he he said uh to teach mathematicians physics is like to teach horses to fly. So, does math itself cause you negative emotions or not really? It was a summer of uh 2002. I feel very helpless uh in applying mental faculties to non-math questions. We were driving and we saw this mother hyena running with a big hunk of meat hanging from her mouth. I guess I learned how to watch horse races on TV, something like that. Hi, welcome to Math Life Balance. Today our guest is Dennis Gaitsgory, professor at Max Planck Institute for Mathematics working on Langlands program, and also my good friend. Welcome, Dennis. Thank you. So, the first question is the question that I ask everyone, and I'm also curious about you. Uh could you tell us what brought you into mathematics? Uh when I was in high school, I was I got interested in physics, but in the guise of physics olympiads, you know, high school physics, but it which I found very fascinating and wanted to just continue in physics. But so when my family moved to Israel, it turned out that the university had a program for high schoolers to take classes at the university, but only in math, uh not in physics. It was this wonderful man Bernard organized it. And then kind of in later years it expanded to all kind of disciplines, but early '90s it was only math. And my dad said, "Okay, just go study math for a couple of years." For him it was very important that I learn functional analysis. He thought it's like the cornerstone and everything. I said, "Sure yeah, why not?" So, I went and there so on day one I met this evil person Sasha Braverman uh who he didn't do anything I don't think he did it intentionally, but he completely seduced me. Like after 2 months I didn't want to hear about physics anymore. So, it was all math and that's it. And were you later at some point interested in physics or going back to physics? Well, I guess you personally know the story. So, so um my kind of more serious encounter with physics was I guess it was 7 years later, maybe less, six. So, there was this program at Princeton at the IAS run by Witten as a head tutor for mathematicians to teach mathematicians quantum field theory. As as one of the instructors at this program, Christoph Gavetsky, he said uh to teach mathematicians physics is like to teach horses to fly. >> [laughter] >> Yet some horses learn to fly. So, there were not supposed to be any graduate students, but somehow Pasha Etingof and David Kazhdan arranged for Sasha Braverman Roman Bezrukavnikov and myself to attend, although we didn't have our PhDs then. So, we functioned as postdocs even though we were predocs. But anyway, so there were uh the three of us basically right out of teenagerhood attending this. And I remember the first class. So, Witten starts his talk like, "Consider the three-point function." And I was like, "What?" I never heard of such thing. So, it was super tough. So, we learned something. But I was like in retrospect, having been exposed to physics during that year, I'm so glad that I I switched to math. Would you say that you learned how to fly? No. No, no, no. I uh I guess I learned how to watch horse races on TV, something like that. >> [laughter] >> So, I kind of know which horse is well, in this analogy with horses winning, or at least which which horse is white, which horse is black. >> [laughter] >> I can relate to what commentators are saying. >> [gasps] >> Okay, this is funny. Yeah, I think mathematicians have very different attitude towards physics. And then I know those who are like extremely interested in physics, and I know those who have zero interest to physics. So, curiously out of this program, so Sasha Braverman, well, I guess in during that year he learned as much as I did, but in 20 years later he started interacting with physicists much more. So, a lot of his papers are physics motivated. But and I guess that year played an important role maybe in some covert way for him. So, I'm sure that he well, I don't know, but like I'm guessing that what he received that year was important to him for his later interaction with physicists. But like so he became one of those people who can interface with physicists. And unfortunately, just overall there are very few bilingual people who really understand physics and really understand math. So, that's it's it's a fact of life. I mean, understand math is I mean understand math as mathematicians. I mean, many physicists know math know math better than mathematicians do, but they don't they're not mathematicians. They they think differently. There are very few people who can who are kind of bi-thinkers. Because I think maybe there is an objective reason for that. It's just hard. Because they're very different modes of thinking. Do you know how to describe these different modes or it's uh a mystery? So, let me just give two examples. So, I remember a class during that year which was taught by Christoph Gavetsky. So, it was about conformal field theory. It's a class where I and also I think Sasha learned a lot. So, but at some point he launched this computations I think with theta functions and something. And there was some resistance from the audience. Like not resistance, kind of incomprehension. And saying that, "Guys, you're mathematicians, you should be happy with this." So, he thought that we if we see this formulas with theta functions we'd be happy. But that's that's not what makes us happy. So, most of mathematicians we want to understand structures. And that's So, basically Okay, let me just I'll convey a model that I created back then, so which was 30 years ago, which was pretty raw and I hadn't returned to it. So, basically for a physicist there exist a physical reality even even for a field theory that only exists in theory. So, something in five dimensions with something potential doesn't converge, but physicists imagine that there is some physical reality. What the physicists want to do is to compute with it. So, there is he has a picture of physics and the computational outcome. But a mathematic and and the physicist is happy with that. But a mathematician wants to exactly understand what's to understand what's in between. So, the structure that leads from one to another. Same quantum mechanics, we don't want just this scalars that come out. We are interested in the Hilbert space. And so, Hilbert space is is exactly that kind of structure. But that was exact that was already more than 100 years ago. And so, there's obviously need for new math that will adequately kind of accommodate physics the same way as Hilbert space has accommodated quantum mechanics um at its inception, but such math apparently doesn't yet exist. Mhm. So, that's that's a big struggle. I see. I understand. So, uh getting back to your story of uh the talks, um I wanted to ask you what makes you like a math talk? You know, I listened to Dustin's interview uh yesterday. Um Ultimately, I want to understand something. So, when this speaker is able to convey to me some content, not a whole lot, just a little bit, I'm happy to understand one thing out of a talk. Walk out with something that I didn't have. So, I'm that already makes me happy. That's exactly exactly the quote from Ravi Vakil's interview. Oh, really? No, I I didn't watch that. Yes, so it's funny how I was very impressed when he said that mhm and now I'm impressed again. So, let me just say that like one of my favorite speakers is Jacob Lurie. Because invariably So, by the way, he his style of delivering talks is very different from Dustin's that you praised in Dustin's interview. He really he doesn't delve into details, but he really he doesn't make jokes, but he tries he tries to convey content. But at exactly so, he pitches at a level which is some You can't be too precise, especially homotopy theory, but he in most cases he finds a way to convey content and not to obscure it by by details. So, that's that's what I really like. In earlier years, so when Drinfeld gave a lot of not lot of talks, he was giving talks. I really enjoyed his style also. Wow. >> [laughter] >> When I was preparing the questions yesterday, my friend saw the questions and he said, "There is priming in this question. What if he doesn't like any math talks?" >> [laughter] >> It's not very often that I like math talks, but I some I do like a lot. And again, more generally I want I was curious what are your most joyful or happy moments in math? I don't think I have spikes of joy in math. Rather when I'm left to my own devices, when just I have the time and space to do math, that makes me happy. Just the process of like lying on my side and just scribbling something and thinking about something, that that makes me happy. It's like it's not this moment kind of momentary exhilaration or something. It's just it's a pastime that makes me profoundly happy. And when I and when it appears in my life when I don't have access to it, that over weeks I so they very miserable that I just something was really missing. So is your brain always ready to do math or how is it for you? No, unfortunately not. So I mean No, like there are periods when I'm like sleep deprived and I just can't. Don't sleep too well. Last 2 weeks it was good. So much better shape and sometimes I'm overcome by anxiety of over this or over that and just I can't focus and there are periods like this. But there are happier periods when the brain is more kind of ready and these are truly happier periods. Oh, it sounds wonderful. And so does math itself cause you negative emotions or not really? So there have been instances. So um when it did happen. So I remember there was one conjecture that I was it was conjecture of mine that I made and called localization of a final algebra's critical level defined Grassmannian. And I thought that it's kind of within reach. So in the it was a summer of 2002. So I made this I tried to make a push for it. Just I went all in. So let me try to do it. And I wasn't able to and I got extremely frustrated. So basically ever since there's some self protective mechanism that I um turns on that prevents me from doing such things. Like when you want to prove something don't necessarily go all in because it really might end in frustration. But back then I did it. I was much younger and there it was frustration. So I and I I became depressed. Well, I don't know not clinically depressed but I remember it was a month. I would wake up and I don't didn't know what to do with myself. I would just go to I I didn't have internet at home. I would just go to the office just to check my email, drive back. I really didn't know what to do with myself. And then it's the same conjecture exactly a year later. Again push and again it didn't work and I was like ah So it it these were strong negative emotions. So fortunately this conjecture got resolved by David Yang maybe exactly 20 years later. And looking at his solution so his solution is right on and I just didn't have didn't develop I could have developed the tools but I didn't have them. It was had to do with more precise theory which I didn't learn uh in grad school which I should have. I didn't know it but that's that's the kind of thing that was needed. He realized it that's the tool that one needs and he developed it and he proved it. Okay, so you just said that okay, the only time you felt negative emotions about math was summer 2002. >> [laughter] >> That's very precise. Uh no no it was it was just one example. I mean uh I just try to avoid since then I've avoided just had this head-on collisions. I mean there are minor frustrations when you try to prove something that you know should be able to do but somehow you lack the concentration. You spend like pages and pages scribbling and then it doesn't work out and then you you go home frustrated. It it that happens but it's not it's not something deep. It's just kind of daily thing. On the same page maybe. Uh could you think about how did your approach to math change during your career? Good. These are tricky questions. So okay so okay what do you mean approach to math? I mean that you can take this question as you wish and answer as you like. Um Interpret as you wish. Well, it could be like approaching problems or I mean everything you evolves, right? Well, which changes have you noticed maybe? Well, my memory declined. That's for sure. So in the sense that if I was thinking about something three three weeks ago and then I switched another subject math topic it would be hard for me to recover what it was 3 weeks ago. Hard mean means that it would take a day of recollections. If it was 3 months ago, it would take a week of maybe I don't know maybe maybe 2 days. And if it was a year ago, it may be lost forever unless I wrote it in an email. So that's kind of and and that may be just brain degeneration or it may be just that too much is going on. Family, whatever. Just stuff happens. I mean when you're younger when you're 30 objectively there are fewer things in your life. So that's maybe that's kind of that's my optimistic scenario of why I was able to retain more. Um Well, but that's I guess that's not what what you were asking about. So there is this old wisdom which is kind of very banal that say that says that when you age what you lose in your mental acuity you kind of you compensate it by wisdom. And to some extent it's true. So I definitely the acuity declines but at the same time I just I bang less my head against the wall. I mean I know that yeah just if I try to do it bash it it won't work. Just better just it just won't work. Oh so you're you became better at predicting. I'm like I sometimes I'm trying to work something out and the inner dynamic of my brain tells me that today it won't work. Just man you're not in in shape to solve this. Leave it alone and 10 years ago I wouldn't be able to. I would I would continue get frustrated. I would not answer one 150 emails. It would accumulate in my inbox. I would like create all this mess and I would like spend 3 more days trying to work it out with more emails accumulating just not paying bills or whatever. So now I I have more of an ability to lay it aside and wait 3 days. Let it mature and then come back to it. So do you think about it in the back of your brain or it happens automatically? You know it's it what David Kazhdan told us in his interview. I think so I mean he had this image of problems maturing for years but I mean they can also mature for weeks. Sometimes you just you have to let it aside for a little bit for a couple of weeks or maybe even a couple of days and there's some process in your brain that kind of tweaks it and then when you come back to it it's all all ready. I see. Yeah, there is this magic. So I I showed this particular piece to to my wife and and she asked me what she asked me what what is this process of like what do you mean that you kind of put it aside? And I couldn't explain it because I think for us it's very intuitive that in some way this problem is always well not always but like for for that period it's uploaded in your brain. Like it's have this I can feel the physical presence of this problem somewhere here or here. Um it's really next to my kind of core processor. But I'm not thinking actively about it. It's like just um it's uploaded but it's kind of running in some strange way. But I think it's true not only for mathematical problems. Like if you're trying to understand a question which is not just Googling but I don't know resolve some non-mathematical problem in your life. I think a solution can also come when you're not thinking about it. >> Oh I wish I knew how to do that. I I never could. >> [laughter] >> Really? >> Yeah. So yeah. So like unfortunately I I kind of this is a theme that recurs as a question to myself over and over that I don't think I have the capacity of really thinking about anything else. So when I have a question to ponder which is not math, I just don't know how to do it. Really there is? No. Really? Yeah. >> [laughter] >> Just the simplest things I just um I don't have the basic analytical tools to tackle questions. Okay, that's very interesting. Let's analyze you. So in the as Dennis is referring to the interview we did with Kazhdan uh and uh David Kazhdan told us that he is never analyzing himself. So that would be hard. So let's analyze you instead. So >> [laughter] >> is it because okay don't worry it's not it's not painful. >> [laughter] >> So is it because well, let's say it's a psychological problem. Let is it because you haven't you think as an example. Is it because you wouldn't have read enough I don't know books or texts in psychology or because you're not interested in thinking about it or like when you say When I'm I'm talking I'm not talking about psychology. I mean just sometimes there are questions in life that come up. They may be practical questions or kind of strategic long-term questions about your life decisions. It's not just analysis. Even that I just I don't know how to think about them. >> Well, I mentioned psychology because nowadays I think for many practical questions you can just ask AI what to do and AI will tell you what to do. So I wanted to eliminate those cases. [laughter] My wife and my son do it very efficiently. I haven't yet done it. So so they do ask AI questions of what should I do today A or B and AI says give them answer and they most of the times they follow and they're happy with kind of the outcome. I haven't yet done it. Okay, leaving aside AI wait I was curious. So do you think it's because you're not really interested in those things or because you haven't read non-math stuff enough? Like why? Oh I read No no no. I read I mean I'm I'm um literature junkie. I I all my life I read a lot. No, I just I read a lot. I mean fiction. I mean I I only read fiction. Just I cannot I I don't So that's one of the problems. It's very hard for me to read non-fiction. My brain doesn't engage. I don't know why that is, but just um I feel very helpless uh in applying mental faculties to non-math questions. >> [laughter] >> Sorry, can I laugh at this because Please, yeah, go ahead. given the success of your applying your mental What did you say? I don't know. Mental capacities or whatever. >> Mental capacities to math problems, I think this is very funny. >> [laughter] >> But have you also met other people who would say the same or you would feel the same way about them or is it just your unique thing? I'm sure many mathematicians are like this. Really? Yeah, I'm I'm pretty sure. I But I don't know. To me it sounds very unrelatable because of course I feel much more helpless when I'm in front of a math problem uh than any other problem which can possibly have a solution. I'm not a despairing person. It's not helplessness is not the word. I'm just helpless in English means that kind of despondency. I'm not despondent. I just I feel that I don't have the tools to answer. That's the It doesn't mean that I answer incorrectly. I mean Do you think those tools tools exist somewhere? Interesting. So I don't know. Yeah. Yeah, at 52 age years of age I should ask myself do do humans know how to intelligently tackle tackle questions? So they are I mean so And sometimes well, what I do I talk to my friends and some of the my friends tend to be very rational and that drives me crazy. It's just somehow I I I think very rational thinking for life questions has defects. You have to throw in some stochastic component of irrationality because like life is irrational and predictable. Yeah, they can take it into rational account. So do you prefer when they take like think about it more emotionally or So I kind of in many ways my way of tackling complex problems is to talk to a lot of friends and take some kind of not to take the average, but just to to gain some input and then make a decision. Well, that's a good strategy. I think you would be happy to hear that when I first started doing my PhD and I went to my advisor Mark Levin with a question in the first few days of my PhD and I told him I have a question and he said which kind of question and I said mathematical question, of course and his answer was who thanks God. >> [laughter] >> So counter story is that well, when Jacob Lurie still was at Harvard, we would we would talk very often, but once in a while he would call me up pick up the phone that that's the time when people still used phones. Now we don't, right? We just text first. So and then sometimes his opening phrase would be I have a non-math question to you. So it's [laughter] as if like he had to apologize for it being a non-math question because the default would be just let's AB infinity category. >> [laughter] [gasps] >> Well, I think it's I think it's a similar kind of story. So I guess if it's an apologizing comment, then yeah. >> [laughter] >> I see. Do you have any advice or thoughts on how to get into math if you haven't done it for a while? How to get back into math? Mhm. For a practicing mathematician? Mhm. Let me share a story instead which is kind of indicative what my advice would be. So when my first child was born, I was well, obviously thrown off from like math thinking. It's just overwhelming. It's just you barely sleep and so on. Right when he was born, like I I think on day like less than 24 hours later, maybe 12 hours later I got a call from Drinfeld. I was still in the hospital and say like So Dennis, in limit 2.3.4, like what exactly do you mean? I said well, I'm in the hospital. I just I can't possibly focus. But anyway, so we finished that paper and then there was a period maybe two three months when I wasn't really doing math. I was I had to teach I had this infant at home and and I felt it was kind of difficult to get back into it's a math thinking. And then what happened is that friend and collaborator of mine John Francis so we had a joint paper that we were supposed to write which which which we had been postponing delaying and delaying and delaying and then somehow I forgot who either he or I decided that now it's time and we got into this working mode. So it wasn't a very complicated paper to write but I'm really grateful for him that he kind of dragged me into this routine of writing the paper. So and it's it was important again, it was not something overwhelming. It's something that I knew how to do. I had to figure out a detail here, a detail there. I had to think through a bunch of things and that's what got me back into motion. But and but it was very important to have to have a collaborator to who would kind of You would think of John as not of he's he's not like I cannot you would not think of him like as an epitome of a gentle person, but in fact he is and he just in some way gently pushed me into it and got me out of the stagnation. So I mean that's kind of that's one strategy one can employ to go back into math. So find a collaborator, start working on something not very complicated, but still not routine that would require a little bit of thought. Yeah, makes sense. Does math help you to overcome life struggles? I think I'm very in some sense I'm pretty fortunate I don't have real life struggles, but like after my accident, like I was in bed for I don't know many months. Well, I could walk, but limping on crutches. It was it wasn't it was no fun. The fact that I I had math to occupy myself with was was extremely important. So if I if during that period I wasn't able to do math, that would have been very very hard. But just having a paper to write and also having this wonderful collaborators was amazing. So I woke up in the you know, I woke up every morning. I just took couldn't take a shower or whatever just and and then I knew what to do next. So write another section, just answer this guy's emails and that that was that's what kind of kept my spirits up. Okay, Dennis, I don't know how to ask you about your recent gigantic success, but um of course I'm curious how to work on such a giant project and also I just answered. It was like it was the ski accident. I mean like it was that. I had nothing else to do. I mean like what do you do for like five months in bed? I mean just you just write section after section. Well, do you always know what to write? I don't know. Well, I mean of course we had the outline. We just we knew what the proof was. One had to just write it down. That was a big enterprise, but like and I was very grateful to have that just to to occupy myself with. But how did you decide to work on something as tough in the first place? No, no, no. I mean there was no decision. So like this story was that well, it had been developing. We just we were getting closer and closer and then 2022 uh Joachim Therrien. I mean this is a Danish name you can't pronounce and Sam Raskin. So they proved the key thing after which we knew the the thing was within reach within reach and then also with some few more ideas of Sam we had a complete proof. So and then well, complete proof modulo all the details. And then it was a question of like rewriting it down. And as usual like I mean when we say complete proof better call it outline of a proof. So we knew the major steps and and we believe that all the other steps can be filled in and and and that was the work. Okay, but with this plan modulo Sam and his collaborators result, this plan you came up before it. Do you want to tell a bit about it? That had existed maybe 10 years previously. We knew that if you if you can do this, you can do this, you can do this, then you you'll be able to do the whole thing. So it was like it was you know, this huge structure, the scaffolding with the bar here missing, a bar here missing, but when this we knew how to kind of where to take this bars from, we we knew how to construct the building. Okay, I am still asking maybe more so for my viewers to whom it's maybe not obvious how do you how do you come up with this skeleton in the first place? Oh, that was that was 35 30 or 25 years of work. It It was developing. I mean so there was this kind of the first first skeleton came about in 2006 2007. And it was it was a very memorable for me. It was Wittens visit to Harvard and he was talking about his work with Kapustin and some something congealed in my head and I I realized this kind of what I called Kazhdan-Lusztig versus Whittaker duality that these two things are Langlands dual to each other and that one can play them against each other on both sides. So there was this mathematically it translated to what I called later well not what later that period the fundamental commutative diagram so it's basically playing Kazhdan-Lusztig and Whittaker against each other twice. And then so that was the basic scaffolding of of the structure and then it was everything else that kind of was built on it how to make it work. Okay so then back to my question this seems okay back then seems like a still very very tough question to to think about and so doesn't it require a lot of courage to to think of >> Back then in 2006? Yeah to go through >> Well it had been on my mind forever. I mean I was I came out of PhD thinking about this. Like it was on my mind all the time I just mm and I had been thinking about it but just that's the fact that one had this basic structure Whittaker against Kazhdan-Lusztig so that was the cornerstone of the structure that was later built. Okay so if you've been thinking about it forever then how did it feel to have this work accomplished? I was fearing that I would be very lost. Uh but fortunately for now that hasn't happened yet. So maybe the ski accident really helped just um somehow I think I was able to just move on to next questions which maybe not as grand but I'm not trying even to think about how grand they are just you know I'm doing math I mean like after all math is step by step even when I was working this it was still like little step every time so when I'm I'm doing other little steps maybe they won't amount to something at the end to something as big but so what so it felt okay otherwise I mean I was fearing it would feel much worse. >> [laughter] >> Well yeah that sounds great. I wanted to ask you how to not lose interest to math over the many years but it sounds like you're having happy time with math so it's actually seems to work. >> [laughter] >> You know there was one period so it's when when we just moved to Bonn that's when I got my first COVID and I never got I never tested positive but all my family did so and I had fever for one day so apparently I had it but then for a month after I would open just my notebook and math wouldn't make any sense I just couldn't focus at all so apparently it was this famous mental fog but I I can't know for sure and I got really scared that oh I just I I lost ability just to do math it just makes no sense. But but then when it went away it might have been COVID it might have been just the discombobulation of of the move the new country and everything. But that was scary. Sounds like COVID yeah. >> that's what I I think that's when I met you the first time by the way it was like Really? July 2022 something like that. You did not look scared. >> [laughter] >> Well it was I I was I would freak out when I would open my notebook and I just not able to just I would not attracted to it I just not had no desire to look further into to my notebook and that that was the that was this kind of scary part because ah Who am I? >> impressive that it didn't happen to you outside of COVID like you know it's a very very very impressive. Very lucky. Just lucky. Okay your brain seems amazing and consistent so speaking of teaching youngsters what do you like to transfer to your kids love to math or it's not so important to you? You see my my dad is a mathematician and he was trying to teach me math when I was a teenager and that was kind of limited success because I was not really interested when he when he when when he tried and then my sister was born I was 14 and he he was too busy he left me alone and that's when I that's when I got interested in physics and then like 3 years later I switched to math I think he feels very good that I became a mathematician eventually but maybe he would have felt just as good if I became a physicist I don't know. Um but my kids um I think my views on this changed since as the kids were growing up I think it's much more important for me that they just become happy individuals and good enjoy what they're doing. I don't really care if it's math. That said if they really didn't know I want them to know basic math well. So I don't want them them to be illiterate in math. Just that's a priority for me like it would be you know for some of my friends it's priority for their kids to know basic Russian literature. I don't give a damn if my kids know Pushkin or not just really don't care um uh but with math I do care. Okay so basic math means what undergrad math high school math what is Uh high school math. Just yeah I you know I I want them to be literate in math. Huh. But beyond that it's okay whatever whatever their interests are. Why is it more important for you than them knowing literature? Good question. No literature is also important I mean like I kind of I think maybe it's even more important for me that they read books maybe it's even more important for me if they read specifically Russian lit or some some some other lit it I don't care. Mm okay. I get it. So I yeah I do want them to read books and I can't explain but if you ask me why is it important for me why is it important that they read books as opposed to just staring at the internet that I won't be able to answer. So I have debates with my wife that's about these values I have I have these values but like I I can't really rationalize why is it so so important to read books. It's been important for me I don't know I I think it's important I but I can't really explain why. Could you tell us about your favorite books or authors or I know these are like two generic questions but anything about your love to literature? Well see I'm not a young person I've read many books. Uh I can just okay this is the first book that surfaced like in my in my mind when you asked the question. Uh A Suitable Boy by Vikram Seth Indian British author and it's it's the volume that thick and so uh I remember I was given it by a friend when I on my second or third visit to Tata Institute of Bombay so I yeah I I arrived and I finished the book that I had with me and I asked someone can you give me a book and he brought me this volume which is >> [laughter] >> 1,100 pages long and I said are you crazy I'm not going to finish it he said you just wait and then like 3 days later you are on page 300 and you forget everything and your worst fear is that what will happen to your life when this book comes to an end. >> [laughter] >> And then I gave this book to multiple friends I I remember I gave it to Sasha Bellinson and he had exactly the same reactions like you are like 100 pages before the end and you freak out because all your life is there. Wow. Uh so the author how to put it mildly had obviously read Tolstoy well but it's not plagiarism by any stretch. Wow no I haven't read it uh I don't know highly recommended. Sounds scary. >> [laughter] >> Yeah it's scary yes especially when you combine the two visit to India well I don't know what India is now that was that was 20 years ago the the country has changed. I mean it's still India. I don't know people say that it changed so much that I don't know but like back then it was extremely interesting to see like what compare what you read about 1947 to what it looked like 50 years later. I mean people always say that places have changed so much but I think if a place had a lot of charm this charm usually stays even if it will True but there's also a question of your ability to access the charm. Not your ability but like as a visit as a visitor so like the the country can build a tourist infrastructure that will kind of impede your access to like the more raw parts of the country which was the most interesting part. Well actually so when I was traveling in India one of the I've been several times but one of those times okay to the viewers it's my favorite destination to travel for holidays I haven't been there for master related reasons yet but I I adore India very much so I went there one time for New Year holidays and I imagined there would be lots of tourists and so I back then we didn't have AI so I was like reading a how's it called book with advice for tourists um The Rough Guide all the time >> like a guide book and the guide book said like oh these are places which are like less popular by tourists so I I I tried to choose those places because I imagined there would be like lots of tourists so we come to those places according to my well prepared route and in those places people have never seen a white person. >> [laughter] >> So those were like completely untouristy places and this was not the level of lack of tourists that I imagined >> [laughter] >> like we haven't seen a white person for a week. I mean, so back then when my wife and I traveled around, so we were we would only travel by local buses, most of which didn't have windows and things like that. And it was you engaged in conversations with people. It was It was just amazing. Yeah, I still did that few years ago, Dennis. Okay. Good good to know. >> [laughter] >> It's still all possible. I remember first time taking such a bus, and to take it cost like, I don't know, 2 rupees, and I only had like 50 rupees and 100 rupees and 200, and the driver didn't have a change, and a woman there paid for me, and I felt so so embarrassed because, you know, they said like, people who don't have much money, and I I felt so much shame, and I was worried, and she said, "Don't worry. India is not about money, it's about love." >> [snorts] >> Yeah, that's the spirit that I remember. >> [laughter] >> Okay, so you told us about books, but what are your other interests besides math and literature, if any? >> Well, you know about them. I mean, I Dennis, it's an interview that we're doing >> I know, I know, I know, I know, I know. I know you know that. Tell us about your fans. Yeah, so well, you know that I um I dance tango. Although, in later years, I have more and more physical impediments for this, like my knee injury, back pain and everything. It just It really seriously impedes me, but I try to do that. I really enjoy it. And it's um It's a Tango is a very strange thing. It's um And I would because I was older when I started engaging with it, I kind of I was more conscious. I could analyze better my own transformations. So, before it was Initially, it was just just fascination with the music. I would hear tango music, and just all my nerves would like um And so, in later years, it's so it's also about music, but it's more >> [sighs] >> it's about a very particular type of physical expression of this music and dance. So, I So, I I'm afraid that the way I dance tango is very unconventional. I'm afraid that I just it's really not quite tango what I do. But maybe it's my own inferiority complex, but like I do some very in the best scenario, I do some very intense physical thing when I try to express nuances in music with kind of very intense physical movements. And when I'm able to do this with the right partner and my when my own physical shape allows me, it's like it's This is very acute pleasure. So, that's what you were asking about math. Like, this is the realest spike of happiness. You have these 3 minutes you're You feel extremely happy. Wow, is it specific to tango or to all dances? So, I'm I'm never danced anything else. So, I don't know. I mean, but people tell me that tango is really different from everything else, and I kind of believe it. Dennis, are there any questions that you would like me to ask you about and I haven't asked? You know, to be honest, I was anticipating, but it's not that I wanted you to ask. I was like I was trying to imagine second-guess you, but it's No, there's not nothing specific that I want you to ask me. Mhm, okay. There are many things I can say, but it's >> [laughter] >> Well. So, let Okay, I There's one thing I wanted to react to in in Dustin's interview, if I may. So, Dustin So, you asked him about the structural math community, and he said, "Look, one thing that really didn't make sense for him is the the structure of grants for mathematicians. Remember? So, and I kind of wanted to second that. So, I really wish we could do away with grants because like I mean, they they do make sense for other sciences, for physics on experimental physics, biology, chemistry, because people really have projects and they have to do experiments. But we don't really have projects. I mean, I mean, when you write your research proposal that I'm going to prove theorem A that X equals Y, either you know how to prove it, then it's done, or you don't know how to prove it. You do you kind of There's You cannot say that I will prove this theorem. You should It makes no sense. Just I mean, we prove what we can, and I really don't think it's a I think it would be exactly as Dustin said, it would better to redistribute this money more homogeneously among institutions than to give it to individuals for projects. Mhm. And like in in the US, there I mean, there's this NSF. Well, it goes to A supporting graduate students, but I do think the graduate students should be supported institutionally, not through grants. Also, it goes to this summer salary, but that's also ridiculous. Why should we get the additional ninth? Like, I write a cool research proposal and I get a boost of my salary, that kind of makes no sense to me. Thank you for saying this. Yeah, you're right. Um I don't know if I'm right, but like you know, I I'm of the same opinion as Dustin that like I think grants keep them for sciences, but not for math. I think I mean, you're right that this definitely should be revisited in a way. Yeah. I mean, it's what it's I mean, the way it originated in the US is because, well, math was lumped together with other sciences, and that's that's that's how it came about, but it shouldn't have been. Okay, Dennis. I'll going to stop torturing you soon, but here's a question that you probably did not anticipate. What are your favorite animals? Spotted hyena. Oh, wow. Mhm. See, so glad I asked. Yeah, so I We saw a bunch of them in South Africa when we were in Kruger National Park, and had a picture of a of spotted hyena cubs as a screensaver on my laptop. And then well, that laptop retired, and I don't have it anymore, but like it's I could really relate. >> [sighs] >> Very strong jaws. >> [laughter] >> Do you know there is a town in Ethiopia, I think, where hyenas are the uh Sacred? No? Not only sacred, no. Um No, they are domesticated in the sense that they come to humans to take food from human hands. I It's very hard to believe. I think it's Well, in at least in South Africa, it's um I think it's the second second in the food chain. So, just beneath the lion. So, >> Yeah, yeah. So, BBC filmed this. Uh So, there is this series called Planet Earth II, which I remember very much. So, they filmed this. I don't know if they were spotted or unspotted hyenas, but indeed, this is just one place one specific town where they have a many many many years um history of doing it. So, hyenas got trained to come to humans. I mean, I still have this image in front of my eyes. We were driving, and we saw this mother hyena running with a big hunk of meat hanging from her mouth. She was obviously tore it from some prey, and was bringing it to her den to her to her cubs. It may be It may might have been her cubs that we saw kind of further down the road, four of them. Yes, and one of them just went around our car, so they were Well. >> [laughter] >> Okay, that's cool. Uh Dennis, which advice would you give to young mathematicians? Okay, so Okay, let me share two things. So, a lot of people Not a lot. Just some people ask me, "Well, should I or should I not be Should I or should I not become a mathematician?" And so, like here is my answer. So, you should become a mathematician is if and only if without math, your life will be miserable. It's definition It's a definition by exclusion. So, if you if you think you'll be happy making money on Wall Street, go for it. Or doing AI. But if you feel that something will always lack in your life if you don't do math, then it That's the necessary and sufficient condition for choosing math as a profession. That's number one. And also, what I get asked sometimes is that So, young person meets another young person who's so much better. And then this first person thinks, "Well, why should I stay in math? Because there is this guy." So, the answer is that that's not good enough reason to quit. I mean, for every one of us, except for perhaps my next door office neighbor, there is always someone who's better. And I mean, it's always But like as Grothendieck writes, I mean, like he he himself He didn't view himself as a strong as mathematician. I mean, he said he said that he many of his his peers were more talented math. But each one of us can bring something. Maybe something which is not less valuable than the next guy who's more talented. Or girl. Or girl, yes. Um Exactly. So, I mean, we all our raw power to solve problems is not the only factor or a vision. I mean, it's Doing math is such a complex enterprise that's you don't even know what's hidden in you. So, that is, if you enjoy it, stay with it. Don't be intimidated by the this guy or that girl who's better. Thank you, Dennis. Thank you very much. Thank you so much, Mura. >> [music]