Last month, I posted a puzzle. A ladybug
starts on the 12 of o'clock. She takes a
series of random steps either clockwise
or counterclockwise, each with random
chance. Each number she touches gets
colored red. And the puzzle is, what is
the probability that the last number to
get colored is a six?
If I simulate it many times in a row,
recording which number happened to be
the last one colored, here's what it
looks like. Running [music] this many
hundreds of times, a somewhat surprising
fact starts to make itself clear. All
the numbers between one and 11 seem to
be about equally likely to be the last
one touched.
I say this is surprising because
initially it feels like ending in a six
should be less likely than ending on the
numbers closer to the initial position,
like the one or the 11.
And yet, empirically, that just doesn't
seem true. And there is a key insight to
understand why. Rather than calculating
the probability of ending on a six from
the initial position, start by letting
the ladybug wander until the first
moment that she hits one of the two
neighbors of that six, the five or the
seven. And then from there, ask the
probability of ending in a six. That is
a different question, but the reason it
doesn't change the answer is because for
any run of the simulation, eventually
she's going to hit the five or the seven
at some point. That's bound to happen
with probability one. Waiting for this
middle condition does nothing to change
the probability of that final outcome.
So, from this state, where she's on,
say, the seven, what's required to end
on the six? Well, she has to reach that
untouched five before ever touching the
six, meaning she has to eventually end
up 10 steps away clockwise on net before
ever ending up one step away
counterclockwise. If that happens, if
she ends up that far around, coloring
all the other numbers, it's a done deal
that six is going to be the last.
Phrased another way, it's like if we
straighten things out and you're taking
a random walk where each step is plus
one or minus one with a 50/50 chance.
And you want to know the probability of
ending up at plus 10 before ever
touching the negative numbers.
>> [music]
>> Again, this is a hard question to answer
directly, but the point is that you
don't actually have to answer it
directly. There's nothing special about
the number six. [music] What's the
probability of ending on the three?
Well, let the simulation run until the
first moment she hits a two or a four,
which again is bound to happen
eventually, and then from there it's the
probability of taking on net 10 steps
around one way before ending one step
around the other way. Because
calculating this probability is
identical for all the numbers between
one and 11, the answer must be one in
11.