seminar series in which BIMSA faculty explain their research to each other, familiarize each other with the research. Uh Uval Perez who is one of the co-organizers of this seminar is going to give this talk of BIMSA member seminar for the second time. Constantin said this is a remembermber seminar. Fantastic name for it. [laughter] So uh let's welcome you. Go ahead. All right, good afternoon. So the main aim of the seminar is to learn about each other's research. Uh we actually in the committee we have still some open slots. Uh the main aim is for faculty but actually if there are postocs here who um you know who have a relevant presentation please contact the committee send us some proposed slides and we will try to fit you in. So now going to my talk. So this is one of the topics I've been uh quite interested in for more than 20 years and it keeps developing and actually what so I'm going to survey some results in this field. Uh this is actually part of a a ongoing book that is soon to be completed with uh Lion Lavine uh who is my former student now a professor in Cornell and Ahmed Burabi who is just started as an assistant professor at UPEN. So um the ailian sandpile actually arose independently in several places. One was the paper of bact and weisenfeld as a model of self-organized criticality. Right? So many systems in physics invol or statistical physics involve parameters that can be tuned and some systems seem to be selftuned to the critical regime and they propose this model of a sand pile. So here is uh some picture of an actual sand pal where you drop sand and it keeps uh as the sand drops in the center the sand pal keeps toppling and it's somehow always near a critical state. So you could try to tune the angle and find in some angles it's stable, in some angles it topples and but when you just pour sand in the center it seems to find itself in these critical angles. So this is a you know physics model but they abstracted it to a graphical model which doesn't look at all like this sandpile model. uh and I'll tell you about it in a minute. But this model turns out to be so natural that it was invented several times independently al you know besides by them also by Dino Lorenzini and algebraic geometry um by Lovash and Bjorner in combinotaurics and it keeps appearing in various guises or different uh variants of it and here are some topics it's connected to and in this survey you'll only see just a few of them but if you want to go deeper all these topics have connections for you know it can a universal touring machine can be modeled using a sandpile and um of course the part I've been involved with is the connection to random walks potential theory also free boundary PDE and you'll see some of those in the next few minutes um so this This is an abstraction. You don't see sand. We have a pile of n grains. So in in the combinatorial literature they talk of chips. In the statistical physics they talked of grains or particles. So you start for instance with a pile of end grains. And then every site in the latis of course has 2D neighbors. So it um it sends one toppling is sending one particle or one grain to each of the neighbors. So uh but this only happens if a site is unstable and it's called unstable if it has uh 2D the degree number of particles or more. So here is some illustration. Suppose we start with 16 particles at the origin. So immediately we send one to each neighbor. We get this picture. Keep going. The center is still unstable. It has eight which is you know more than four. And now it's still unstable. It has four. It's still the only unstable site. So it sends. Now the origin is empty. But each of its neighbors is unstable. It has four. Remember unstable means at least the number of particles is at least the degree of the vertex. So at least four in two dimensions and so we keep going. Uh so we topple this site then that site you might ask what about the order that we choose to topple sites and the name a billion sand pal should give you the hint the order doesn't matter the final configuration you get. So eventually you'll get to a stable configuration and this is almost there. So this is stable, right? No vertex has more than three particles. Um and we had to make some decisions along the way which side to topple when. And these decisions don't affect the final configuration and they don't affect the number of toplins we need to do until we reach the final stable configuration. So that's the Ailian sandpile. Um and this there is a physicist in India Dar who did a lot of the early insights early research on this. The first physicist back then mostly just presented the model but he really analyzed it mathematically and I'm already jumping to what this sai looks like with starting with a million grains at the origin. Um and what do the colors mean? The colors record how many particles are each are in each site. So for instance the blue locations have three particles and when when you look at this configuration you first think well maybe if I continue it will go to a ball but it actually doesn't. So so this shape is is remarkably stable if you do it with a million particle or you do it with a 100 million which has been done it looks exactly the same including the color pattern inside. This was a mystery for a long time and a large part of it was explained in a remarkable paper in Duke math journal 2013 um by Pegen and Smart who showed that there is a scaling limit to this shape. Um I'll come back to that story a bit later. Um so the picture I showed you before which is the same one in small on the right is when we have zero background so we start with empty sites except for lots of sight a million you know a million particles at the origin but it's also natural and useful to think of some background and on the left you see background too. So the origin has a large number n of particles but everywhere else we start with two particles and when we do that we actually get a square and that's uh that's provable proved by fay and readig and and not hard that you exactly get a square not just in the limit but at every stage you get a square these squares keep growing if you add more particles at the center but you always have the same butterfly in the middle no matter how many particles you put And in the middle you have background one which is so every part every site starts with one particle except the origin that start with a million and you get this approximate octagon. This is already not exactly there is some smoothing at the vertices but the uristic is each time uh so background two you get a square. Each time you reduce the background by one uh you know you add four edges to this shape roughly. So we have 12 and um with height zero. Now it also makes sense to start with a negative background. So uh you know background minus one means that you have to drop five particles there before it can topple. And this rule if you drop the background you keep adding four more edges. Then it is proved that in the limit as the background goes to minus infinity you do go to a disk. Now what about initial background of three? So initial background of three if you start with four particles at the center it will never stabilize. Um so it never stops toppling. So one general question is if I start from some complicated configuration in the latis when will it stabilize and when it does not that's it turns out to be a delicate question and I'll just illustrate this uh for a moment. So for instance if I start with um I could start with these blocks. So in this picture uh I'm starting with green means three in this picture. So I start with say three. See if I'm doing continuous toppling. Yeah. So I start with three particles at most sites and but the red means two. So I start with two at some locations. And it turns out that this configuration, no matter how many particles I start at the center, this will stabilize. On the other hand, if I start with this skew latice um then even if I just start with this skew latice and you know 100 particles at the center uh even though reds means height two even though I start with only a smaller fraction of threes so most of the initial locations are twos this will keep going forever will never stabilize. So even if the background is between two and three, it's it depends on quite delicate properties to predict whether it will stabilize or not. This simulation is actually due to anderoid uh very nicely done. So let me uh stop with this and go back to the presentation. Um so we get see that this works. Yeah. So a key way to study these models is to look at what we call the odometer function which counts how many times x u of x is how many times x topples when we start with some initial sand pilea or in other words how many particles does x send to one of its neighbors uh during stabilization. And if you look at the discrete lelassian of this odometer U, so just the sum of U on the neighbors minus the degree time U of X, um what does it mean? It's just the number of grains received at X minus the total number of grains emitted at X. So we have so we have this connection. This is exactly the final configuration S infinity minus the initial configuration ATA. So um now this suggests how we will analyze the scaling limit of these models by going to the corresponding PDE. Now we'll get there yet. So this is some example of the odometer function. And this is how the odometer function looks like. When we start uh at with n particles at the origin, zero everywhere else and the odometer u is pictured on the left. The initial configuration n delta 0 plus the lelassian of u gives you this final configuration. And again this picture the different colors indicate the different heights. S infinity just has uh four heights 0 1 2 and three. So well what does the picture look like? What does the odometer look like? Uh so the odometer solves a discrete obstacle problem. These kind of obstacle problems have been studied a lot in uh PTE. They're closely related to free boundary problems for the llassian. uh what makes this one different is this constraint that u has to be an integer. So so this makes it much harder to analyze but it turns out useful to also relax the integer requirement. Um now uh this odometer satisfies what's called the least action principle. So I could think So w could be some other function which indicates how many times I want to topple each vertex. And I could ask which functions W have the property that if I topple according to this prescription W I will get from ATA to um to a stable configuration. So I want to take ATA adding dental W just means toppling according to the instructions W. And it turns out that the odometer when I do just legal topplings it's the most efficient way. So it's the infeumimum of all the functions W with this property. And so it solves this problem. Um so in other words u is the smallest non- negative function with this upper bound on the llassian and being integer valued. So the requirement of being integer valued makes things very delicate. So it's natural to see well what happens if we drop that requirement. And then we get another model called the divisible sand pile. So in the divisible sand pal it's similar rule but instead of starting with uh particles we start with mass continuous mass and and then the degree instead of talking about the degree the rule with the divisible sand pile is um a site is called unstable if it has mass more than one. we just normalized. And if a site is unstable, it takes the excess mass and sends it equally to the neighbors. But there's no requirement of integrality. This mass is continuous. And this model guides much of the analysis of the more delicate integer model much easier to analyze. Uh so that analysis is actually in joint work uh I did with Lionel Lavine back you know so it appeared in 2009 it was done almost during his thesis work 20 years ago and for the divisible sand pile we know that the limiting shape is a ball up to an additive constant error. So you start with you start with n particles and uh but now you think of them as continuous mass. So you start really with a mass of n very large mass and you keep toppling every site topples all the mass that's bigger than one and you keep going um until you have to actually take the limit. In the limit you have some sites that have mass. Maybe you can see it in the next picture. So you have some site Sorry. Some sites that have mass one, these are in blue. Some sites that have mass between zero and one, but this is just a boundary layer. And then outside mass zero. So this is the picture. And in this case, the limiting shape is a ball in a very strong sense. The error is an additive constant. Now um already in the 1980s another model emerged from statistical physics which is ideal. So this is a closely related model but instead of toppling instead of making fair division the fairness is replaced by randomness. So um so we start with n particles at the origin. That's the same as before. But the rule is each particle perform in turn performs a random walk until it exits the current shape and then it settles downward where it arrived. So this leads to a random set of sites. This is a an example of the particle and I won't go into the example of the cluster. I won't go into the colors here. They represent where the site came came from. But the main result here is goes back to 1992. Lawler Bramson Griffith showed that the shape here is again a ball. So this is earlier than for the divisible sand pile. um in the sense that the error but the error is not an additive constant. What they showed in this work was that the error is little O of R. This was refined later um first by Lawler to cube root of R and then in independent work of Asella Godilier and Jerus Lavine Sheffield it was improved the error is logarithmic and even root log R in two dimensions for this model but it's not a constant error as in the divisible sample. Now yet another variant is what's called the rotor model. So in the rotor model instead of the randomness we replace it by a rotor turning around and maybe um so let's see if I can get to the definition. So we start with the origin each time we add a particle and the particle walks but instead of walking at random it walks according to rotor. So every vertex has a rotor and when the particle reaches the rotor first rotates and then the particle moves according to the rotor. So it's a deterministic analog of random walk. And here again the shape is a ball but it's a much better approximation to a ball. So here it's an open problem actually to show how close it is to a ball. What we know now is again logarithmic error bounds but the actual errors seem to be constant. So for instance, if you look in this roto router model for the out radius minus the in radius empirically and we've gone far beyond a million now it never exceeds two but the error bounds are logarithmic. So in the random model we know the error bounds actually the there are upper and lower low bounds which are logarithmic. In the rotor model, the upper bounds are logarithmic, but there's no lower bounds. And we suspect the truth is that in the rotor model, there's a constant error. So, um, what is this picture? So, this is a picture of a rotor model, but instead of one center, we start with two centers. And, uh, and again, when you have these n particles, each particle does a walk, but it's not a random walk. It's a rotor walk according to these rotors that rotate in a you know norththeast southwest and what you get here instead of a ball it's this domain which is known as a quadriure domain. So just like what's a key property of a ball harmonic function at the center of the ball equals its average on the ball right the mean value property what's the property of these quadriure domains that harmonic function uh in this in this domain it's its average at the two centers equals its integral over this domain and if you want now a ball also has the property that a superharmonic function at the center is greater than its integral over the domain. And the same thing holds here. A super harmonic function uh if you average it at these two points, it's the same as its integral over the domain. And I'm sorry, it's greater equal than its integral over the domain. And this property for super harmonic function actually characterizes these domains. So these have been studied a lot in potential theory. And for instance, it's known that this one has a boundary which is a algebraic curve of degree four. Just like for the ball it's you know algebraic of degree two for a for disc is degree two. This is something specifically in the planer case and you won't be surprised that if you there's an analog with three starting points and then you get a domain and it's the boundary is algebraic of degree six and so on. Um so there's a lot here that goes beyond what I can uh discuss now. So um so a lot of the analysis comes from taking scaling limits and maybe I want to say something. So for the divisible sample when we don't have the integer constraints uh we get you know we have the same obstacle problem I mentioned before but without interesting without integer constraints. So u the odometer for the visible sand file is infin infimum of the functions uh which satisfy an equation on their lassian and their real functions. So when you pass to a scaling limit you get you know what's called an obstacle problem or PTE with free boundary and for that for those there is a precise theory um so this works starting with multiple sources and again because of time I'm just going to say that the if you start with particles at multiple sources is we can describe what is the limit using the corresponding PDEs and um as I said there's a connection to these quadriure domains that have been studies especially in the 70s in complex analysis and potential theory um so again these functions these domains satisfy this connection for superharmonic functions when you average h at the the centers with any weights lambda i uh you'll get so the weights actually determine the domain um you'll get it's greater than the integral of h and and gustafson in 83 showed that the boundary of these domains is an algebraic curve of degree 2k if you have k centers so that's the curve See? Yeah. This is the exact equation for two centers. Now, when you work with the Ailian sandpile, the picture is much more complex and indeed uh Levine and I believe that the PD approach is doomed for the sandpile because the scaling limits are latis dependent. So how could a PDE capture the latis dependence if you work with a divisible sand pile of a rotor routter or idea the there's no latice dependence the you know with one point it's a ball with several starting points it's quadriure domains it doesn't depend on which latice so you expect you know PTE to work but in the abilion sand pile the result you get so below it's some three-dimensional but on the top it's two dimensional with different latis and you really get different behavior. Uh so we thought well PD approach is doomed and nevertheless you see for the ability sand file that there is a scaling limit. So how do you approach it's latis dependent but it does exist once you fix the lattice. So how do you approach this? So it turns out the PDA approach is not doomed and this theorem of peg and spark again from 2011 appeared 2013 they managed to get uh PD solution which was latis dependent. So the class of PTE that arise is much more complicated and the information about the latis enters into the PTE description of the scaling limit. So this appeared in Duke math journal in 2013. There are a couple of follow-up papers um in annals of math and gaffa where they describe the scaling limit more in more detail. find a connection this is joint with levine they find a connection to appalonian packings and this is a whole complex story that I really can't tell just direct you you know if you look at pegden smart and the follow-up papers with lavine you'll see a lot more information number theory connections and and so on um so this is one of their results saying that if you start with not just with the origin but periodic initial condition you get a scaling limit and you can describe the scaling limit as lelassian of the solution to an elliptic PTE but that it's no longer simply the lelassian um you know the standard llassian and it's um so you don't get you don't get the disk but all these shapes that we found can be understood there although only the outer shapes the exact Um the exact butterfly pattern even inside the square is only partly understood so far and the understanding in higher dimensions is still more limited. Here you see example of the scaling limits of these abil sand pals in three dimensions. So thanks to Ahmed for these uh wonderful pictures and again there's only partially understanding of that and um Burabi has extended it to uh not just periodic initial conditions but also stationary erodic backgrounds. And this is a single source sand pile started with 2 to the 27 grains at the origin in three dimensions. Um so so the scaling limit we know exists but to describe what it is in in this three-dimensional setting is still open. One intriguing thing first observed by physicists and now there is starting to be proofs is what's called dimension reduction. So if you look at these sandpile configurations in 3D so there are um in 3D there are you know every vertex has six neighbors so there are six possible uh six possible heights and if you look if you look at these configurations and you slice them by a hyper plane you get a planer configuration that can arise from a two-dimensional sand pile. So there's, you know, slices of the um a billion sandpile final stable configuration in higher dimensions yield configurations in lower dimensions. Some of this is explained and you know some of this is still in progress. So here's the example of the slice. Um when you start with background four in Z3. So background four in Z3 is like background three in like background two in in two dimensions. So you get a cube as the scaling limit but the structure inside is still is still mysterious again. So it was uh Leo Kaplan and Gray that first observed this dimension reduction and you know only a few of these are now proved. Um so this is a theorem of Bura B where he has managed to prove one of the cases of this dimensional reduction relating the sand pile in D plus one dimension a slice of it to the sand pile in D dimensions and there's a whole classification of these which I won't go into and it's still in progress. Thanks for your attention. All right, questions. &gt;&gt; Uh, thank you very much. Uh, pictures you showed how resemble the hashta picture hashta butterfly. Is it any relation between these two problems because as far as I understand everything is connected with discretetness of the system. So again which so wrote but which exact model are you referring to? &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. So I I don't know of this connection. We can discuss that later. &gt;&gt; More questions. Uh thank you for your talk. Uh can you go to the page of the second model? I think it's called discrete uh what the first one is a billing one, &gt;&gt; right? &gt;&gt; Yeah. The second one was the divisible sample. &gt;&gt; Yes. So so so I hope you define the model by by the solution of this well the condition thection condition. Yeah. Yeah. It's a property of the model. So the visible sample can be defined um by the dynamics. So you start with some initial configuration. For instance, a large mass at the origin. It could be other configurations. And the rule is you topple all the excess mass, all the mass bigger than one. A site is called unstable if it has mass bigger than one. And if it does, then mass m minus one is split equally among the neighbors. Okay? So you get m minus one over the degree to each neighbor. and you iterate that and you have to pass to the limit and the limit in the limit you'll get a configuration which is has mass one in some set mass between zero and one in the boundary of the set and then mass zero outside the as you're doing it you can use the odometer to measure the odometer here measures how much mass was sent from each vertex to one of its neighbors so that's it's the same to each neighbor And that odometer satisfies this uh this equation but without the integer constraints. So right so it's the same equation as this one but instead of mapping to n it's maps it maps to the to the positive reals and satisfies the same the same equation again. instead of 2D minus one you get you put a one here. So this is uh this equation occurs. So the odometer arises um right here it is let's go where it ish so you have the same kind of equation but maybe I didn't write it down here um the same kind of equation equation as before but you don't have the real valued constraint. So the 2D minus one is replaced by one and you instead of being integer valued it's real valued but that is a result of the model. It's not really a definition of the model. &gt;&gt; Okay. Thanks. And maybe another question. So is that possible to consider the dynamics of of a different uh like diffusion regulation such that you can change the latis change because there are for for ability model there are for different analysis you have different behaviors right so is that possible to for formulate all these kinds of case to square like this but you change the uh way of diffusion it's like you don't diffuse to four directions but some other directions which will have a like a &gt;&gt; occurren correspondence with the laplash. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I I understand. So, so that is analogous to changing the latis just looking at a different latice and if you do it for the ailian sire you still get a limit shape but it's different depending on these rules of you know of the distribution while if you do it for the three other models the IDLA the divisible sandpile or the rotor routter the only change you could make is of course you know you sometimes instead of a ball you'll get an ellipse if the If the coariance matrix of the distribution is not the identity or is not isotropic but just by an affin transformation you always will get the same shape in the other models while the ailion mod a billion sile is very sensitive. &gt;&gt; All right. &gt;&gt; So the pictures you showed correspond to uniform background like one two. So suppose you take stationary background. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; What do people look at it? More chance it may be for universal. &gt;&gt; Yeah. So it's it's delicate and it even depends on kind of number theoretic properties of the background. So so actually in the simulation I showed this example of blocks. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I random. Uhhuh. So yes there it seems to be the question is just you know the expected number of particles per site if you have it I again if you have it iid it's been well analyzed and then it's just a question of the is the expected number of particles per site um so anything if you have [sighs] anything that's bigger than two then it will be unstable uh if it's iid if the means are bigger than two for the obelian santaa but you know we can discuss more um so iid initial conditions have been analyzed other erodic conditions you know are Yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; More questions. &gt;&gt; So, so can you have you said there is it's possible to be completely unstable, right? &gt;&gt; Sure. If you have start with all threes and four at the center &gt;&gt; and comes back and perpetuates and goes back and goes back. &gt;&gt; Yes. Yes. So, you have these waves. That's right. wave and and in fact one thing I didn't enter at all which is of great interest to the you know in the physics is to understand these uh kind of power law of the size of avalanches. So that's a whole different topic which is a major focus in in physics &gt;&gt; and and you called it a billion because &gt;&gt; so you know symmetric not my name I think it was Dar who used that so &gt;&gt; is it symmetric group of the latis &gt;&gt; no no no it's not it's not because latis so it's a billion in fact dar was already studying it on quite general graphs so the the graph no the ailion property is that the order in which you perform topplings doesn't affect the final configuration. So there's commutativity and um &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; so a billion works for all graphs. It's not it's not dependent on the graph. So this is a yeah that's completely general and it's not hard to prove it's really an observation but it makes it &gt;&gt; yeah a bit yes there are variants that are that are nonabilian yes but um you know you need to change the rules There was a Yeah, &gt;&gt; thanks. So, uh I'm curious about the dynamics of the case that you don't get convergence to a stable configuration. &gt;&gt; Uhhuh. &gt;&gt; So, does it go in a cycle eventually? So you could do this on a fin you know on a finite graph if the number of particles is too large to stabilize of course it will cycle. Uh on an infinite graph it's not going to cycle. So you will see some waves coming back but if you go you know the there will also be waves going further and further. So it will not cycle. So this initial configuration, the simplest example is four at the center, three everywhere else. It never cycles, but it never stabilizes either. But you do see some waves going back and forth. &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you very much.
