- Good afternoon, I'm Dan Freid and it's a pleasure to welcome you to this final seventh
lecture in this series on the Millennium Prize problems. This is a series of lectures that we've had throughout the
year that's jointly sponsored by the Department of
Mathematics here at Harvard. The Harvard CMSA, Center
of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, and also the
Clay Mathematics Institute. So without further ado,
today we're very happy to have Peter Sarnak from the
Institute for Advanced Study who will tell us about
the Riemann Hypothesis. (audience applauding) - Thank you. And thank you
for the invitation to do this. When you invited me, I'm
sure you weren't expecting me to announce a proof of the
Riemann Hypothesis today. (audience laughing) Had I had one, I would've
even announced it here, but I can tell you that since agreeing to give this talk, and
especially in the last few weeks, I've got an uptick of the
number of proofs in my mailbox. (audience laughing) I normally get, I used to
get one every few weeks and I would actually look at them and maybe even respond. But since AI came along, that
number's gone rather large. And in the last few weeks,
it's gone even larger with requests for me to
announce other people's proofs at this occasion. I have not verified any proof. I have not seen anything
that looks like a proof, but that's 'cause I haven't looked at many of these things that have arrived. So I want to explain to you
why this is a good problem. It's a problem that goes
by the name of hypothesis. I'm going to start with that. I'm not going to go into the math details as much as tell you why
Riemann conjectured it, what applications they might be, why what I think is a good problem and what I think is the real problem here. So let me get moving. I can use this thing,
I can point if I want, but I'd like to move around a bit. Okay, so the statement
can be made very quickly. It's the following statement. You take the sum of n to the minus s, which before Riemann had
been mainly considered by people like Euler as a
function of the real variable s when s is bigger than one. And that's a product of the
prime numbers of one minus p to the minus s to the minus one. You can expand that out collect and that captures with it the
unique factorization theorem, which is equivalent to that identity. So we have two representations
for this function when s is bigger than one and firstly Riemann
allows s to be complex. In fact, a lot of the
theory of entire functions was developed after this
work in order to try and understand this problem further. So Riemann, he has one paper on this. I'm going to talk about it quite a bit. He extends this function to a homomorphic function
in the whole plane as a function of a complex variable. It's got a simple pole at one and he derives an amazing relation called the functional
equation that if you append to z of s, maybe I should point. So if you append to z of
s, the gamma function, the gamma function is
something we know very well. Riemann understood it very well. I'll show you where it
enters into something he was doing in a minute. Apply to the minus s over two. If you multiply this
factor, the new function, in his paper, he actually multiplies by s times one minus s in order to get rid of the pole even, so that to
say the function's entire. Anyway, we'll allow the pole, then this function has a symmetry that the value at s is the same as the value at one minus s. And then in this paper,
he makes not a conjecture. And I want to highlight
this, a hypothesis, and I want to make, that's very important in the way he's thinking,
he makes a hypothesis. We call it the Riemann Hypothesis,
that all the zeroes row of this function of the completed function lie on the line of symmetry. So they're into many zeroes. He knows that; it's not
obvious, maybe not obvious, but he certainly knows that. And that's it. Any problem that can be stated
that quickly has one good, I'm going to tick off all the
great things about this problem. Easy to state if you know
what a complex function is, elegant in its answer all the
zeros on the line of half. But why is it interesting? Okay. So Riemann doesn't make a hypothesis. He does make a hypothesis. He never made a conjecture. He does not make a
hypothesis without evidence. Nobody knew but Riemann checked
the first few zeros himself, a highly non-trivial thing
to do with a pen and pencil. A pencil and paper, not a pen and pencil. But many people looked at what Riemann was writing in his math class, but it took the genius of
Siegel many years later to understand what Riemann was doing, when in some computations
we had actually computed the first few zeros. And I want to show you that he
computed the first few zeros in order to make his hypothesis. He wasn't going to make this hypothesis just without any evidence whatsoever. So how did he do this? How do you compute this
in with a pencil and paper and say that the real part is
exactly a half of the zero. So the first few zeros that he computed or the first one's about
14, the next one is 21, 25 and point something. They are on the line here. They're symmetric because of
the fact that the function at s and at s bar is the same. And then these are the first few zeros. And how can he be sure that,
if he's computing here, how can he be sure that the
real part's exactly one half? So for this purpose, he needs
to have an approximation of the Riemann zeta function
in the critical strip. So I didn't explain to you yet, I'll say a few words about it later, of how he analytically continued this. But the natural thing is
this function is very easy to describe as a rapidly
convergent series. But there's a fact of
gamma s over two there. And if you know Sterling's formula, if the first zero is at height 14, gamma of s on the half line will be e to the minus 14 times two pi, which is a **** small number if you're computing with your pencil. So you have now killed
that number by everything you're computing is zero
to many decimal places. And so he had to overcome that and he did. The remarkable thing he did was that he obtained an expression for
the logarithmic derivative or for zeta the logarithmic derivative in the critical strip, which was so good that it's still the best we know today. It's the golden standard. Riemann developed a method which now is called the Riemann-Siegel formula 'cause Siegel understood
what Riemann was doing and wrote it up and it's the best. The question is how
many steps can I compute the Riemann zeta function at height T? The height, at height T he knew, and I'm not going to give any proofs here. There are about log T zeros and the number of zeroes is
going to be the complexity, which is going to allow us
to see why this conjecture at least when generalized, is
one of the great conjectures. So his idea is I'll
integrate f primed over f around a little contour
containing the first zero, which he goes up the line
guessing where it might be, does this integral, the answer he gets is going to be an integer. He calculates it accurately enough. The integer's one, the
integer's one, the zero has to have real part equal to a half because otherwise there'd be two or more. So that's why every zero
that's ever been computed of the Riemann zeta function is simple or we wouldn't know it's
on the line of half. So when we say we verified, we were lucky that it was simple, he
was lucky it was simple and many zeros have been computed and I'll discuss that in a second. But this was his idea and his method gives that
to get the zero at height T, you need about square root
t steps of computation. That's the gold standard. Actually that was improved
by Odlyzko and Schönhage and further by Hiyari just for Zeta, you can improve it down
to T to the one third. And using that, I think the biggest zeroes that have ever been computed
or at 10 to the 36th, you don't go all the way up there. You'd go straight to there
nearby and find you do something. You can actually say
exactly which zero it is. And that was done by Boban Hiyari and that's as far as you can go. And as I say, the only reason that we know that the zeros are on the line
is because they're simple. Because if they weren't
simple, we would not be able to tell whether it was a double zero or almost a double zero
with a finite calculation. Alright now that's what Riemann did and he called it a hypothesis. So why did he call it hypothesis? Because he was trying to do something else and this was a working hypothesis for him to achieve the goal of what he was trying to do in this paper, in
this very short paper, he was trying to prove
the Prime Number Theorem. That was the big unsolved
problem about prime numbers at the time, Gauss who held the chair before him, there was Gauss directly and then Riemann was the first to really formalize this properly. And Riemann discovered that
if you use complex analysis and some contour integrals orders and understand the zeros of the function, you could write the following function, which was already in the literature well documented by (indistinct) which is a sum, it's best
to count prime powers, not just prime. So p to the k less than or equal to x, therefore the Prime Number Theorem, that's not a relevant issue
but this is an identity. There's some p to the k
less than or equal to x of log px is greater than or equal to one. A real number is x minus
the sum of all the zeros, not just the ones of my function c or his function c but of Zeta. That's a conditionally convergence series. The man gave us convergence,
Riemann sums, Fourier series. He knew what he was talking about, that sum's conditionally convergent and the right hand side
is an exact formula for the number of primes up to x. And then he wanted to prove
the Prime Number Theorem, which is just the asymptotic
that psi of x is asymptotic to x, meaning that divided
by x goes to one when x goes to infinity and he sees the x over there. So it was very convenient if
all the real parts were less than one and where are they? Well it's on the line of half
according to his first three. So he made the hypothesis and he says he will return to this. Yeah, he died very young as we all know, but I don't think he returned to it. But he outlined how to tackle the problem. Hypothesis allowed him to,
working hypothesis allowed him to make the conclusion that he
thought was more interesting. I dunno that he revisited it. But his ideas, and I'm going
to give you many examples like this, led to an
unconditional proof of what the consequence was. And that's the Prime Number Theorem. And that's the famous theorem of Hadamard and de la Vallée Poussin,
1896 some years later. And they showed just enough to prove the Prime Number
Theorem that the real part of any zero is strictly less than one. I'm not going into any world
records or anything like that. That's equivalent to the
Prime Number Theorem. And that was a highly non-trivial step and that is what I
would call a workaround. There's a hypothesis, a
working hypothesis, it leads to what you want but you get
your conclusion anyway. So that's the example. So
it's got a great problem. It's firstly elegant, easy
to state, it's falsifiable. But why all the fuss? I mean who cares about, alright, we've got the
Prime Number Theorem. Why do I care there's
zeros on the line, a half? Actually, so let me make clear here. If you prove the Riemann Hypothesis, it would be monumental mathematically. The Clay Institute I believe
would pay the money out if it's correct. I don't have any doubts about that. I'm sure personally that it would involve new ideas about integers and structures, some products and things like that. I'm going to discuss that in detail. But I would be extremely
disappointed if all you did was prove the Riemann Hypothesis
for the Riemann zeta function and no other zeta function, because there aren't any
interesting applications of the Riemann hypothesis or sort of knockout
applications that I know. So it's in the context of more general conjectures all identical that the problem becomes really powerful. But that doesn't mean you
shouldn't not just work on the Riemann Hypothesis 'cause I'm sure if you prove
the Riemann Hypothesis, somebody would say I'll prove
the others the next day. But you can never know. Somebody might find some
very special feature. I don't know, I'm just randomly saying what is the best consequence I know of the Riemann Hypothesis itself. Well it's going to be about primes. Later, I'm going to show you
Riemann Hypothesis implies things in many, many different fields. That's why it's interesting. But one consequence is we like to know, well this is all just
about the Archimedean location of primes. So Selberg showed in '43 that if you assume the Riemann Hypothesis, there's always a prime in x,
in an interval x is large, x plus log x squared,
which is a short interval. That would be way too
much to prove, very hard. But for almost all x that's true. And that's at the scale
that's already very small because it's a log to a power. That's a consequence of Riemann, which to me is probably
the most interesting. If you want to see the consequences of Riemann being a little bored,
look at Titchmarsh's book, an amazing book called "The
Riemann Zeta Function." Everything just about the
Riemann zeta function. Now other function in the world. And then he has this
section on the consequences of Riemann Hypothesis. And you say, ah, is this
a problem we're working on or highlighting? Well it's a great problem
because I'm sure that it's part of the general picture
and that's my argument. Alright, sorry. Now if you disprove
the Riemann Hypothesis, so you find a zero for the line, and this was asked to me by Nick Truten. Would this be a terrible thing? So you go, we've gone certain height and there's a zero off the line. There are a few things
that are interesting here. Firstly, the Clay may not pay you. (audience laughing) Did you know that? I've
read the fine print. Not 'cause I had a counter
example, but they're crazy. They say they don't have to pay you if you disprove a conjecture. I'll pay you, I'll crowdsource for you if you find a zero off the line. (participant faintly speaking) - That's why I said crowdsource. (audience laughing) So if you find a zero,
curiously, you would be able to solve problems that are unsolved by finding a zero off the line 'cause there's some
Landau-Siegel repulsion property that the minute you have
a zero off the line, of any L function, it
prevents other zeros behaving in certain ways and you might
even just take that one zero and actually solve a problem. And it might even indicate to you what that problem might be as we go along. So you might solve a problem but that if you found a zero
off the line, the real truth is it would be a disaster. And the reason it would
be a disaster is not because one zero off the
line will upset any of us, but how can we believe there's
just one zero off the line? Then we have to believe that it's false and then it's false more generally. And then I'm going to
try to convince you that if it's true, it's one of the great truths of numbers in the mathematics. So it would burst our bubble. I'm sure anybody who wants to
do that would be very happy to see that bubble burst. But anyway, a lot of us would
be very upset if it's false. But you could ask, well
what about this evidence I was just showing? The 10 to the, what was it, 36, that's quite high up; as I said, no one's checking the zeros, it's probably 10 to the 12 that we know the first so many. Turing also was trying to get his machine immediately
to find a zero off the line. And this is what people
want to convince you, the power of other technology. Is that convincing? Well you got to be cautious because the most important
thing is the complexity that I'm going to return to
all the time or the conductor. It's the number of zeros. And if you had height 10 to
the 26 or we had height T, the number of zeros is only log T. And so they haven't really
started to get very close because you've taken the number of zeros, there's only log of 10 to the
26, there's quite a few zeros. But if there's a feature
where they're going to go very close and
maybe move off the line, you have to go much higher. So you should take such
things with caution and everybody's computed
this always says that, but I think it's falsifiable and you've got a lot of
cases where it passed. So it's very good in that way. Alright, so I'm now going to introduce what's called the Generalized
Riemann Hypothesis. And this is where it takes shape after Riemann through other L functions and where it becomes a very, very powerful working hypothesis leading to solutions or problems through workarounds. And if true, many
conjectures would be solved. There are many theorems, let's say assume Riemann Hypothesis. No there are not many
theorems which say assume Riemann Hypothesis then. There are many theorems would say assume the Generalized Riemann Hypothesis then. Okay, so I'm not going to give you the most general definition, but at least let me give you the one that can give you the flavor
of what I'm talking about. So the Riemann zeta function
has got many generalizations. I'll talk about Dedekind Zeta functions. At the very end, I'll talk
about L functions that we know. So this is very important. We know the soil in which
we grow these functions, they all come from automorphic forms. The reason for me automorphic forms are so interesting is they're the
only source of L functions. So we know where to grow these objects and it's in that context that we believe all these
conjectures are true. And so I won't talk much
about automorphic forms except at the end, but let's take Dedekind data function. So we take a finite
extension of the rationals and we can do the same thing. The class number may not be one, but there's unique
factorization into prime ideals. And the identity that
Euler wrote down is true the same way, this is due to Dedekind. The sum of the norms of the ideals to the minus s is a product
of one minus norm of the ideal of the p the minus s to minus one. And then this function also
has an analytic continuation function equation, that is not easy. Dedekind was not able to prove this. It took the genius of Hecke to do that, because I'll say that the
additive structure combined with the units of the number
field were too complicated for the early workers. But Hecke explained this and the function has the same feature. This is very important.
There's something new. If the degree of the extension
is in, there will be, I'll just assume all the embeddings of the number field are real. Then it's this famous pi to
the minus s of the two gamma s of two that you saw that Riemann put. And then there's the discriminant. And this is all about
ramification conductor. That's what the Riemann
Hypothesis controls. It controls ramification
in a very deep way. That's where the power
of its applications come. So the discriminant is
the places the primes at which the number field is ramified. The ramification is built
into the discriminant through an integer and that appears in the
functional equation. So the functional equation
now has this conductor or complexity and the most important thing is that the number of
zeros that are locally. So if you go high up, you'll have more and more zeros, but look low down. The number of zeros that a
Dedekind zeta function will have will be log D over two pi, logarithm. I urge you to note logarithm
that's going to allow me to transcend complexity classes. Log of the conductor
is the number of zeros and the number of zeros
if you are polynomial, would be related to the degree, clearly the complexity. So the log of the conductor
is like the degree. Alright, so we have the
same and what's GRH? Well a great conjecture. There are conjectures, we say if, but, this and some conditions no change. All the zeros on the line and
half, no change whatsoever. GRH says all the zeros of
all these old functions on the line and half, period. Okay, so that's the
conjecture which is called GRH and that's a conjecture that we all, or me anyway, thinks of
as the Riemann Hypothesis. Now of course these have also been checked but only in very low degree 'cause these things I
said we can grow them all but they're hard to grow. But there's an amazing database that you can go play with yourself. It's this L function and
modular forms database and Drew is one of the key players there, and it contains a wealth of
information about the zoo and from the zoo, each element in the zoo gives you a zeta function. And each zeta function
has a Riemann Hypothesis. And each of those I think
has been checked more or less for its first few zeros. And the species is quite complicated and so you might think,
well those guys are probably not going to satisfy it. I'll return to that. The GRH is that they
all satisfy it, period. I'm not going to try sell the subject. I've had somebody once
come up to me and Say, "Well you haven't proved
the Riemann Hypothesis. What have you done?" (audience laughing) Well I've got a job okay? Just as in the case of
Riemann, there's a workaround, he has a hypothesis. Let's start out that the
Riemann Hypothesis in general is still a hypothesis. I've never heard it called the conjecture. It's a hypothesis, a working hypothesis. If it's proved of course then, we don't have to conjecture it, but it implies amazing things. And what's remarkable is
in many, many problems you can still prove those
things unconditionally. And that's why the
subject is very vibrant. And there's a whole theory of the analog of maybe the Prime Number Theorem, which is the non vanishing
theorem of L functions, that's very general. There are substitutes for
the Riemann Hypothesis, which say well maybe, so here's how you diagnose whether
this might be useful. If I have a problem and I want to see, could I say I assume the
re-generalized Riemann Hypothesis, I get my conclusion I'm very
happy, can I get rid of it? Well the first question you
ask is if there's one zero, will one zero of the line kill you? If then, then you can trouble. But if one zero won't kill
you, then probably not so many zeroes won't kill you either. And then there are
density theorems would say that there aren't many zeroes off the line and then things become unconditional. They're off the shelf
theorems of that type and the subjects thrive. There's estimates, uniform estimates that come from having
the zeros of the line. If you're an analyst,
you take a log of zeta and you apply the three line theorem and you use that log is
analytical all the way up to the later half, you get where everybody's getting powers, you're getting now log to a power and so that's much stronger bound. So you get uniform bounds in parameters and you know exactly how things
behave if you assume GRH. And sometimes in many
interesting problems, you don't need to get the full
optimal bounds, you just need to get underneath certain bounds. And that's called sub convexity. So I'm not going to give you a
lecture about what we can do, but I'm just saying the
subject is absolutely thriving in general and that's what
the theory of L functions is trying to do. And if this great truth
were on top of it known, it would've the impact that you could take many, many theorems and
say I don't need to work. You know a lot of the times
we are like tightrope walking over a bridge in order to
use this estimate there and that there and then
get onto the other side and then you'll just have this
highway you just drive over. And many theorems in
books would not be needed though the techniques are
often more interesting. Alright, so I'm going to
give you some examples of the application of GRH
where it's working hypothesis and where the things were proved anyway, just like a hypothesis should be. So the prime number film is
the first example that I gave as the main example. But here's another example. Prime are P. Can you tell whether a large number, and I'll give you by the
complexity of the numbers, the number of digits can I tell whether it's a prime number or not? Do I have an algorithm that will in finite times tell me whether I'm prime or not. And that was first proved
under the Riemann Hypothesis by Gary Miller in '75. He used GRH in a serious way. It used the conductor feature
that I'm telling you about, that if two L functions look
the same up to logarithm, then they are the same forever. This is this conductor control. Exactly in that way, it
was quite unexpected, but very welcome that this
was proved unconditionally by Agarwal, Kayal, and Saxena in 2002 by using some of the same ideas but then not working with
the L functions themselves but another setting. So often the substitute might be directly an off the shelf application. Often it's the same idea
or variant idea that's used and sometimes it's quite different. So I'll jump now to something very recent to something called the
André-Oort conjecture, which was proved by Edixhoven,
Klingler and Yafaev. Assuming GRH in 2014 is the general paper. What is this conjecture? It's about special points
on sub special varieties called Shimura varieties. And the points are special
points, they're called CM points. And they claim the
conjecture is if they aren't, if say you have a sub
variety which doesn't contain the Shimura sub varieties,
so they're not special then they only finitely many
of these points that lie there. So it's a finite atmosphere
and it was proved under GRH. But recently it's been proved
completely unconditionally by Pila-Shankar-Tsimerman with the appendix by
Esnault and Groechenig. It's a tremendous achievement. But I'll tell you one thing that the, when you prove such deep
theorems that something's finite that's kind of complicated like that, it's often ineffective. That is the only finitely many points on the sub variety is part of the theorem. They prove it but they can't tell you that they've got all the points. And if you knew the Riemann Hypothesis, you could make their proof effective. And if you found a zero off
the line, this is the kind of thing where it might be
making such a claim ineffective. So as far as I'm concerned,
Andre ought to solve except for the effectivity issue, which would be given the information we
know become effective. It's right now ineffective. There's a lovely conjecture but Odlyzko and Poonen has
recently been solved using GRH. This is a case where we don't
know how to remove it yet. I'm sure this will be removed, but right now it's conditional under GRH. That is if you take a polynomial
with zero one coefficients, is it with probability
one as D goes to infinity. So there are many theorems
where you let the As go through integers up to T and then
that's a very easy theorem. And if you fix the A in
finite, big finite sets, that's also been proved. There are many variants. But if you take zero
one, it's very tricky. And right now that's a
conjecture of Poonen and Odlyzko, which was proved recently
by Varju and Breuillard and the proof is using
Riemann at some point where something is
proved to be an expander, and they need some operation and some product needs to
be shown to be an expander. Perhaps my favorite one. So I've shown you something in complexity. By the way, there's also
another one in complexity. Can you recognize whether or
not is the recognition problem of a knot being knotted or unknotted in NP and the first proof by
Kuperberg of this assumed GRH and then (faintly speaking) gave a unconditional proof. So these things get out to things where at some point you're
using integers in a deep way or something like that, usually primes. And I want to show you
a case where of course the generalized Riemann Hypothesis
probably has a lot to do with number theory and this is the one that I like best, in fact. So since the invention of what's called the Hardy-Littlewood Circle Method, this problem has always
been the bottleneck. I want to count the number
of solutions to a sum of three cubes equals
a sum of three cubes. There are many solutions, but I want to give an upper bound which
is sharp for other purposes. I'm not going to justify one.
This is kind of a central issue. The one that's very quickly
raised in the subject. Hua, an expert on the Hardy
Littlewood Circle Method in the 1940s gave a bound. So the trivial bound, obviously
if the x is like most T's, T to the six, but he
gave a bound much better, which is T to the seven over two. And the conjectures is T to the three. Give a little epsilon. It cannot be better than T to the three because I can have x1,
x2, x3 equals y1, y2, y3. And so I've got TQ solutions. And Hooley proved an amazing theorem that you do get T to
the three plus epsilon. If you assume the generalized
Riemann Hypothesis for has L functions of three folds that come from an analytic
tool that he invented. So there's a whole Diophantine analysis and at some point, one
over these s of L functions enters into his analysis, one over L. He's not looking for primes
and he needs to control that. And if you can control that, and he says if you assume
the Riemann Hypothesis. So this is the kind of thing that I don't think anybody
has any hope at this moment to replace and do this unconditionally. So the last two I'm giving are ones where we haven't worked around them yet. And the last one and there,
okay, I have a number of papers which are still
conditional under GRH. I was at the seminar of Katie Wu today. She was explaining the theorem. She assumed GRH, she's going to remove it. So there, it's a working hypothesis okay. Another reason this conjecture, and I am raising this 'cause I want to explain why
the conjectures are great if it impacts other fields and if it's somehow we can
learn something from this. So there are other analogs of this. This is the famous function
field in which we understand a lot of things and that's we
replace the rational numbers by rational functions over a finite field and we replace the
integers by polynomials. And then you have the
same yoga you have factor, you can factorize polynomials into primes and you can form a zeta function. It's standard here not to use
a variable complex variable S, but the parameter T, because all the functions are
now polynomials or rationals. So you don't want to write down something analytic function in P to the minus S. It's very confusing. So you make this change a variable and then you get that the zeta function of the projective space, which
is just FQT, can be computed and it's got a poll at one and this completed zeta function. There's no numerator,
there are no zeros there. So if this were the Riemann
Hypothesis in the function field, it would be a bit boring. It is boring. But Emil Artin in an insightful
game changing paper, said, well let's look at a finite extension or what is the curve over a finite field? And then you do get a numerator
that's not so hard to prove. He proved it, it's a
polynomial of degree 2g where g is the genus
of the function field. And you could ask, well is the Riemann Hypothesis true for this? And he did. There's a functional equation which takes t to one over qt. And so in this variable
T the zeros are all going to be in a circle if the Riemann Hypothesis
true at the fixed circle of that transformation,
which is one over root Q. And there's a fantastic generalization of this conjecture due to
Andre Weil where instead of having curves of a finite field, you have smooth projective
varieties of a finite field. And he understood how
to formulate the analog of the Riemann Hypothesis
called the Weil conjectures. And Weil himself proved
this Riemann Hypothesis that Emil Artin imposed. During the Second World
War, he gave two proofs. One is a absolutely brilliant
proof using surfaces using curved cross itself. It's the one that many of us
still hope might be relevant in the real thing, but I'm not
going into attempt too much. And Grothendieck developed a
cohomology theory which was vital and the lean was
able to prove the analog of the Riemann Hypothesis in the setting. And let me assure you, that's got millions and millions of applications. I'm not going to even
start to try to list. That's used in exponential sums and used in many, many,
many things in engineering. But the crucial development here that opened the door here was that you can linearize a
problem, that is that the zeros of the zeta functions
in the function field can be realized in terms
of the Frobenius morphism which is a map x goes to x
2Q acting on this cohomology. So that's where it's linearized. And so we have a linear
interpretation of the zeros or a spectral interpretation of the zeros. But I think it's very
important to understand that this linearization doesn't
put the zeros on the line or on the circle in this case. It's not like, oh this is some magic and there's something that
there's some self joint Hilbert-Pólya problem this I'll return to. There's no magic like that.
This is a very big extra step. They gave two proofs. There's a proof using
combinatorics, a polynomial method of Stefano for all four curves. But once you get to higher
dimensions, the only proof that's known is to not
look at one guy at a time. And this is extremely important. We dunno how to prove
the Riemann Hypothesis for one variety at a time. We have to deform them in a family. In math we always know you take
one guy, I dunno what to do, but if I can move it and in this argument there's something that glues the different things. It's called monogamy.
That's what Dalene used. And by deforming he was able
to learn the Riemann Hypothesis for all varieties for the
only once and all at once. The glue you get from one to all. (participant faintly speaking) - The deformation is a new data function. And the big one is also you
use growth and index machinery. It's a fantastic, it's one
of the great, as I said, one of the great
achievements of 20th century and all that's for this analog problem. It's a, maybe I shouldn't say it in this, but baby analog problem, okay? So I hope that in explaining GRH, that that's a great problem. For me, it qualifies in
every sense of the word. It's elegant, falsifiable, each case is elegant, falsifiable. If it's true, I didn't give
you that many examples, but it's extremely powerful
truth about the world. So that's a great problem. Tells you something that's
well below the surface that we don't know why it's true, but if it's true, it's
very powerful that we know. And of course a great problem also inspires generalizations
in related fields. So in that sense, GRH and I
call RH, GRH, indistinguishable, is a problem that should be on the list and on anybody's list
and Clay's list as well. If somebody disproves
the Riemann Hypothesis, you pay them. (audience laughing) That I don't like. It's the only thing I don't like. The beauty also of this is
that the Riemann Hypothesis, I mean it's replaced the
Fermat's Last Theorem. Fermat's Last Theorem was what
you know, you come into math, you want to try your
hand at it immediately. You can now do it with a
Riemann Hypothesis 'cause, and people are simply, for myself, so where there's not so
much info in it for them, but it's so easy to state. And I want to now comment. So the rest of this lecture
will be some commentary of where we at and probing it. So we have substitutes, but I'm
not going to talk about that. So I gave a lecture seven
years ago, which was the 150th year I think since Riemann's paper. And they had a big conference in Bristol, where I compared different
approaches and different ideas and I won't go through them except to review some salient points. And let me just start with
the most basic salient points. So the Riemann zeta
function relates with sum and the product and we dunno
how to mix these two structures in a way that's decisive. The analytic continuation is
gotten by harmonic analysis. Whatever you do, it's always
the same harmonic analysis. We put the integers inside the real line, they fit very beautifully. And R mod Z is a circle with its measure and it's a discreet subgroup. It preserves the motions,
the quotient compact and we do harmonic analysis on the circle and there's something
called the Poisson sum, which is equivalent to
Riemann zeta function functional equation, purely additive. That's the one side. And then the other side is multiplicative. And the multiplicative side
is of course the interplay between them is what makes the
problem interesting and deep. But on the other side is
we think multiplicatively. So we need to combine the two if you want to somehow understand this problem better. And so 99.9 attempt at the
Riemann Hypothesis by the public, let's say, can be shown to be wrong because they only use
the functional equation and not the Euler product. And this is highlighted and I want to highlight this in spades because it's something quite interesting. If you took a binary
quadratic form, definite, Q x, y with integer coefficients and you summed it Q x,y of integers is not zero to the minus s. So that's going to start to look
like a Dedekind zeta function of a imaginary quadratic field. And suppose that the class number of that imaginary quadratic
field is bigger than one and not one, then this series
that you wrote down there will not have an Euler product. If I add all of those together, which have the same discriminant,
the inequivalent classes, I will get an Euler product. So I've got a finite
number of Rickles series that look like into the minus s. They each have a functional equation. Each one looks, so if
all you're looking at is the functional equation, each one will look like it's
got a functional equation with the right kind of behavior. But none of them satisfy
the Riemann Hypothesis. They all have zeros in the
real part of s bigger than one. If the class number's bigger than one, if the class number's one,
there's only one guy there and then it's a Dedekind zeta function, it better satisfy the Riemann Hypothesis. So the issue of the Euler
product is absolutely critical. So any proof that tries just to use the functional
equation has no chance. Even Selberg in 1980, he
became very famous 30 years before, 40 years before for proving that the Riemann zeta function
has a positive proportion of its zeros on the line half. And then people were saying,
okay, now we, you know, he's got this proportion, we
are going to go the whole way maybe, I don't know, even
a hundred percent wouldn't prove they're all on the line. It just is a percentage. But he realized and he wrote
a very interesting paper or maybe he gave lectures on it, it's only the institute to
archive all these lectures if it wasn't published, that each of these zeta
functions which fail Riemann will still have a positive proportion of the zeros on the line. So those statistical
theorems are not touching the Riemann hypothesis, they
are absolutely not touching it. And so it must have been a
bit painful for him to come and say, "All right, now
let me show you actually I don't need the Euler product. I can still prove this." Actually a hundred percent of these zeros for good reasons are probably
on the line and half. So mixing the additives and multiplicative structure
remains a challenge. There are wonderful
advances in some product and Kakaya and expansion. These are all about some product features that are the combinatorial nature. But this is a very structured
problem where we don't know how to combine the two directly. All right, now I'm still
talking about why the Riemann hypothesis is hard. I think it's fair to say, and I've looked at this that
in the first 30 years before, even after the Prime Number Theorem, I don't think people really
thought this was a hard problem. It's clear that Riemann himself said, I'm going to return to think if it's true. He checked the first theory,
he did what he needed, he moved on. Other people started to think about it. And I think there were people
giving their students thesis. I think Littlewood was given
a thesis from somebody proof of Riemann Hypothesis. So I don't think people understood whether it was hard or not. And we don't, how do you
know something's hard? I can't prove there's no easy proof. But I think it's fair to
say that there's nothing that's not very well hidden. If there is an easy proof,
it's very well hidden and there's no easy manipulation
that's going to give it. So I think we should appreciate that. There are many equivalence
of the Riemann Hypothesis, a dime a dozen. And people look into
this one way or another. For me, they are curiosities mainly because any equivalence is interesting. But if you use the equivalence to say something I don't know,
then it's very interesting. But none of these equivalences
have led to anything that the standard theory doesn't give in terms of applications that I know of. So I don't find them very interesting. But let me give you one, because
I was debating when I was preparing this how quickly
I can explain the Riemann hypothesis to the man on the street. So I had to assume that the person knew what a complex analytic function is. Well now let me drop that. They need to know what a prime
number is and that's all. So one of the standard equivalences
is if you take lambda N to be minus one to the
number of prime factors of N, total number of prime factors of N, so that's a plus minus one. And you ask is that coming
down as you go over N randomly? So it's very easy to see that
the sum N up to x of lambda. And if you average those
numbers, those plus minus ones and divide by x that goes to zero, is completely equivalent to
the prime number theorem. That's tautologically almost equivalent to prime number theorem. And the Riemann Hypothesis
is a quantification of that, that that sum will cancel
up to square root x if you always put your safety value of the epsilon there, Mr. Treferman. So (laughing) while
elementary proofs of the first have been found and
they're well documented, there's recently been a proof
which I was always dreaming to see, an Ergodic theoretic proof found by Richter and McNamara in 2021. And so the Prime Number
Theorem does seem something that you can prove elementarily, but those methods don't
give you any quantification. On the other hand, if I were to explain, so now this is probably the easiest way to state the Riemann Hypothesis. Two, anybody can understand
it now without knowing complex analysis. And it looks like it's probably true because these numbers
are random you're saying, but showing something
explicit is random is one of the hardest things in mathematics. If I said to you proof pi is normal, you'd look at me like I'm crazy, nobody's going to try proof pi is normal. That's just too hard for humans. So when you have something
that's completely explicit, you want to show it's behaving
like something random, it's a challenge. And that's one of the reasons
this problem's really hard. Okay, so I mentioned the linearization that occurred beautifully
in the function field case and I also even mentioned the
Hilbert-Pólya, which you see. So I think Hilbert and
Pólya according to Odlyzko, he got a letter from Polya
which did verify this was true, that they were suggesting that maybe there's some
interpretation of the zeroes where you have a self joint operator and that puts the zeroes on a line. I think that's crazy. I mean it's nice if you, but that's not the way it's proved in any situation where we know it. And that's just looking for something that I think is too much. On the other hand, I wouldn't
dismiss the linearization 'cause there's a fantastic
evidence that the zeros are behaving like Eigenvalues
if anything was in the world. So there was this amazing
encounter between Dyson and Montgomery in '73 at
the institute, which led to the following statement,
which has now been verified and understood numerically
and phenomenologically and analogs all over the show. And that is that if
you look at the spacing between the zeros of the
Riemann zeta function, so I'm saying of course if
there were linearization, a linear algebra, some
linearization of the problem, obviously that is maybe a first step. And then maybe the second step is to try understand why the
zeros aren't in a line. But there's something here that's saying that something itself, a joint somewhere, at least statistically,
and that's the following. If I look at the zeros
and we go compute them and let's go compute them
near the 10th to the 20th and they're 70 million neighbors and remember the density,
the complexity is log T. So if I want to make the
spacing be roughly mean spacing one and look at these numbers and I look at say the
consecutive spacings, the local spacing statistics,
they follow the laws of random matrix theory, what's called the Gaussian
Unitary Ensemble to the T. Let me show you a picture. It's a consecutive spacing of the zeroes. These are the zeroes
that's computed by Odlyzko. And the curve here is
what random matrix theory, what a random emission matrix would give. That curve is no elementary thing. That curve's a Pane Laveur what? Four. It's given, actually Wigner couldn't compute that curve. It took Gordon to prove,
to actually calculate it and it satisfies a certain
thread on determinant and then satisfies a non linear ODE. Anyway, we know what the
curve is theoretically. And the random matrix
predictions never fitted this well, anything the way this fits and the zeroes repel each other. That's what this to second order there and have this profile. So the zeroes want to
behave like the Eigenvalues of random emission matrix and sort of, you can't ignore that, right? That's a statistical statement. It's giving me some hint
about a linear interpretation. And it is what drives many people thinking about this problem. This phenomena has been checked also for families in the function field where we understand everything. Katz and I were able to explain where this random matrix
theory comes from scaling limits of monodromy groups. So in the function field we
understand this very well, but in the number field there's some hint that something like this might be true. I want to now talk about how my heart, so there are many, many
approaches to Riemann. I've never seen one that
put it in the ballpark. I'll return to that when I come to AI. But I wouldn't say from my experience that Riemann Hypothesis
is in the ballpark. I don't want to limit
what other people can do and what they know. But I've never seen something that this is in the
ballpark at this point. There is an idea that is
very dear to me, Paul Cohen I came from South Africa
to study with Paul Cohen to study set theory. I'd studied forcing and I arrived and I said I'm all ready
to study forcing with you. And he said, well he's
not interested in that at that time; he's interested
in the Riemann Hypothesis. I happen to know what it was. I said, okay, well I've come a long way, I just changed my interest. And then he said immediately
you take the adeles, this, this, this, I don't
know what he was talking about and take that here, single formula and just sort of throwing
all sorts of things. He had this idea that Alain
Connes picked up later in the nineties and has
been writing a lot since and was formalized by Meyer. And it is a spectral
interpretation of the zero. So let me make clear that this
is a spectral interpretation. Is it useful? That's another math. But as I've been saying
in the function field, you don't get them zeros on the line half. So this is a very nice idea
and it mixes the additive and multiplicative structure. So even though so far
this hasn't worked as far as I know it's compelling. So if you take the following space, it's called the adele space. So this is an infinite
product, A infinity, A2, A3 where the A infinity is a real number. A2 is a two attic number, A three is a three attic number and so on. And AP is a periodic
integer from some point on. And you put the topology on this product, what's called the
restricted product topology. This forms a topological space and you do the same with
the invertible elements where the elements are non-zero. And from some point on, there are units and you put the restricted
product topology. These spaces are called
valuation vectors by Tate. They give a new treatment of Hecke's work that I mentioned, it's highly nontrivial. Hecke and Tate
conceptualize it beautifully and they involve Poisson
formation on these adele groups to do the additive part. So you look at a of the
Q, that's a compact space. Q is a discreet subgroup
embedded diagonally in the adeles and the ideles of the quotient is not quite compact, but it's discreet subgroup
there and well understood. And you either work additively
or you work multiplicatively. When you work additively, you
get the functional equation. When you work multiplicatively, you get the Euler product for beanie serum, very beautiful. And then you recover the analytic continuation functional equation. So what Cohen's idea is
you take something strange, you take the adeles with its topology, which is very different to the idele topology
and you divide by Q star. This is a very singular quotient and you look at the action of
multiplication over addition, you take x goes to x times
y, where y is and idele. And you look at this action and formally he kept on
saying, well this trace, if you take the trace of this, you're going to get the explicit formula, what's called the vague explicit formula. And that's true, you
can make sense of this. That's what Connes has done. That's what Meyer does completely. You have to make fancy
topological vector spaces in order to have function spaces on which to do the, compute this trace. Nothing self adjoint here. The function spaces are
topological vector spaces. I'm allergic to those. But they're used. And when you decompose this action, you get the explicit formula of Riemann or Renuard Riemann and Ray, and moreover than that, you get that the
decomposition of this action. All the Eigenvalues are the
zeros of all the functions. Nobody says that on the line of half. But that is a spectral interpretation and it's certainly interesting and Connes has written
a lot about this since. Even recently, there's an
archive paper where he updates and says what he's been thinking about. And the best part of it with
the one that I was really taken by is he writes this amazing letter to Professor Bernhard Riemann
explaining to him his ideas and I urge you to read it. It is just wonderfully written.
I would never have that. But now that he's written that, I feel I also got to write him a letter. (audience laughing) We always love writing
letters to Professor Riemann. Alright, I want to end by explaining what I think is a direction. So the question is how
much have we probed this Riemann Hypothesis? We've looked at zeros high up for zeta, we've looked at zeros of species low down. Where should we look to really test this? And the real test is in
the end limit in my view where we haven't rarely tested it. Some people have a little bit, but not in the sense
that I'm about to say. So we let the degree
of the number field go or here's the first time. I'm also going to allow L functions of automorphic forms which live on big and bigger groups. And let me remind you that
the complexity is always log of the conductor and
the Riemann Hypothesis, the way it's used in
many of the applications that are stunning that I gave you, is that ramification is
controlled very heavily if you know the zeros on the line of half. So much so that if you have a sequence of algebraic number fields of discriminant, the NK is the discriminant,
you get better lower bounds for the discriminant in
terms of the degree extension than you would get from
the geometry of numbers. In fact, these bounds are
so strong that they seem to violate the Riemann
Hypothesis in some cases. And every time everybody makes
a violation, they go back and check and see, well of
course they made a mistake. Riemann was not false. But there are these amazing towers of very few unramified extensions called Golod-Shafarevich Towers and they come very close to violating the inequalities that the Riemann Hypothesis implies. And so this is a very good test. I saw some interview with Sier, and he was saying that,
yeah, he tested a few and it violated Riemann. He realized, well I'm not
going to question Riemann was his life, but maybe you should, this is a limit that I don't think we've
tested numerically at all. Elk is as examples, they've
both no counter example, but I want to tell you where they may be, but I don't believe it will be. So the name there was
ramification is controlled and I want to take the end limit and ramification is controlled by Riemann, very much controlled by that. Now there are automorphic forms that are transcendental in nature, but they are just as kosher as any other of our species as far as I'm concerned. Some other people might
say they're not kosher, but I'm going to say they're kosher and they're called mass forms. These are everywhere
unramified, automorphic forms. So the L functions are
everywhere unramified. So you might say, oh my god,
that's already a contradiction because there should certainly,
you can't have something that's nowhere ramified,
these guys are everywhere unramified, their existence
is already very subtle. They only exist, they're the
building blocks, they exist. We can show they exist in low dimensions. In high dimensions, we have never really probed this. This is what I'm really wanting to probe. And they all connected
with the Archimedian place. So everything that's
in this function field where we understand things, the function field has
no Archimedian place. That's why it's algebra. It's the Archimedian place that
causes all our difficulties. And here the mere
existence of these forms, which are everywhere unramified. So of course if you're
going to use Riemann, I keep on saying there's one definition of the complexity of an L function. It's the number of zeroes locally, that's 'cause that's like the
degree of the entire function. So how many zeroes does it have locally? And if you have the zeta
converter function well and it's fixed, it's all
coming from the conductor as I was explaining. Here, there's no conductor,
it's everywhere unramified. So it must come from the
Archimedian place and it does. And those Archimedian
place, it's the Eigenvalues of differential operators. Elliptic operators is really
transcendental on this beautiful locally symmetric
space of N by N matrices divided by SL and Z, divided
by the maximal compact. Those are these everywhere
unramified objects and they have L functions and those L functions are
supposed to satisfy Riemann. And those have never been tested. That's what I really
would love to see tested and I'm sort of been thinking about it now for quite a while. It implies that these
things are very rare. These are objects with low energy. It also means Riemann will imply that the levy concentration, if
you go to high dimensions functions that got some smoothness, concentrate around the
mean very, very sharply. And the Riemann here would
say that sharpness is so high that you're not going to see
many things with low complexity if Riemann's true, if there were too many of these mass forms,
Riemann can't be true. For me, GRH, I was careful in
doing Dedekind zeta functions. And then you're going to have
somebody to ask me the moment about motivic L-functions. These transcendental
things are not motivic, but they're there. They are in our zoo. They are no different to anything else we know
about any of the others. So to me, GRH must be true
for them as well if it's true and if it were not true for them by sum, so this is a probing that
I really eager to see. And if it were not true for those and true for Dedekind zeta functions or what are called motivic L-functions, then it would explain maybe
why the problem's so hard. Because the automorphic forms, these are the automorphic forms that come. You can't ignore them in the
number field if you write the trace formula, these
guys are sitting there, these are the building blocks. So I would love to probe
this in a serious way. And there's an elephant in
the room in all this. It's AI. What's AI going to do for us? Well, it's certainly
causing me to get a lot of solutions to the problem. (audience laughing) But it would be nice if
AI would actually probe some of these limits for which we may have less
confidence over the proof. Anyway, I hope to convince you
it's an interesting problem when you add G to RH. Thank you. (audience applauding)