Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                                № 4/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                   Tr iangulations in geometr y:
                   from Ptolemy to Teichmüller


                                   Matthew Pressland




       Ptolemy’s theorem is a classical result from ancient
       Greek mathematics, concerning the lengths of sides
       and diagonals of a polygon drawn in a circle. In
       this snapshot, I will explain why this theorem is still
       important today through its role in Teichmüller theory,
       a subject which seeks to describe all possible “shapes”
       of a surface with boundary.

1 P t olemy’s theorem

It is a famous mathematical fact that any triangle is circumscribed, meaning
it has a (unique) circle passing through its three corners. How easy it is to
visualise this circle depends on the shape of the triangle—the centre of the circle
may fall outside of the triangle, for example—but nevertheless it always exists.
For shapes with four or more sides, this is no longer the case (see the rightmost
image in Figure 1), and those which can be circumscribed have very special
properties.
    Ptolemy’s theorem is a fact about circumscribed quadrilaterals. It gives the
formula
                                   xy = αγ + βδ
for the product of lengths of the two diagonals of such a quadrilateral in terms
of the lengths of its sides, as shown in Figure 2. Ptolemy (100–170 CE) was an
ancient Greek scientist, who discovered this theorem while studying astronomy.


                                           1
   F i g u r e 1 : Every triangle, but not every quadrilateral, is circumscribed.

                                                     β
                                 α

                                     x
                                                         γ
                                                 y
                                         δ




Figu r e 2 : The lengths and diagonals of a circumscribed quadrilateral always
           satisfy xy = αγ + βδ; that is, the product of lengths of the diagonals
           is equal to the sum of products of lengths of opposite sides.


   Rearranging the formula, we see that if we know x, α, β, γ, and δ (that is, the
lengths of the sides and one of the diagonals of our circumscribed quadrilateral),
we can compute the length y of the remaining diagonal via the formula

                                         αγ + βδ
                                  y=             .
                                            x
    Now consider a more general circumscribed polygon, with n sides. By
choosing n − 3 diagonals of this polygon which do not cross each other, we may
divide it up into n − 2 triangles, all inscribed in the same circle. This division
is called a triangulation. For example, choosing either the diagonal labelled x
or that labelled y in Figure 2 provides a triangulation of the quadrilateral.
We cannot choose both x and y, since these diagonals cross: the four small
triangles appearing in Figure 2 are not inscribed in the same circle as the
original quadrilateral. A triangulation of a circumscribed pentagon is shown in
Figure 3. The same figure shows how we may pass from one triangulation to
another by “flipping” a chosen diagonal: any diagonal is shared by two triangles,
and these two triangles together form a quadrilateral (whose sides may be either
edges of the original polygon or other diagonals in the triangulation). Replacing
the chosen diagonal by the other diagonal of this quadrilateral yields a new
triangulation.


                                             2
                                       flip




   Figu r e 3 : Flipping the bold diagonal in a triangulation of the pentagon.


   If we choose a triangulation and measure the lengths of its diagonals (as
well as those of the sides of the polygon), we can then start flipping, and
use Ptolemy’s theorem repeatedly to calculate the lengths of all of the other
diagonals of the polygon.


2 H y perbolic polygons

For polygons drawn on a flat piece of paper, Ptolemy’s theorem may seem to be
of limited interest. After all, most polygons are not circumscribed, and without
this property, the theorem does not apply. However, the real power of Ptolemy’s
theorem appears when considering geometry on the hyperbolic plane, which is a
curved surface. For an exploration of the foundations of hyperbolic geometry,
see the snapshot [4]; here I will give a brief introduction.
    On a flat surface, the shortest curve between two points is always a straight
line. The hyperbolic plane is curved, so every path within it is as well, but any
two points are still connected by a curve of shortest length, called a geodesic.
Much as we draw distorted maps of our spherical planet on flat paper, we may
represent the hyperbolic plane as a circle in which geodesics are given by circular
arcs meeting the boundary at right angles (or, as a special case, straight lines
passing through the centre of the circle); see Figure 4. This is known as the
Poincaré disc model and was made famous by artist M. C. Escher (1898–1972)
in his Circle Limit series.
    Figure 4 (right) shows a tiling of the hyperbolic plane by triangles drawn
in the Poincaré disc model. Despite appearances, the triangles do not actually
get smaller near the boundary circle. This reflects the distortion inherent in
compressing the infinite hyperbolic plane into a finite picture. We think of the
bounding circle as being “at infinity.” In particular, all of the arcs in Figure 4
have infinite length.
    An ideal polygon in the hyperbolic plane consists of a set of points on the
boundary circle, with neighbouring points connected by geodesics. An example
of an ideal pentagon is shown in Figure 4 (centre). The word “ideal” here refers


                                        3
Figu r e 4 : Geodesics in the Poincaré disc model of the hyperbolic plane (left),
           an ideal pentagon in this plane (centre), and a tiling of the hyperbolic
           plane related to Escher’s Circle Limit series (right).


to the fact that the edges of the polygon do not actually meet in the hyperbolic
plane, since the boundary circle is at infinity.
    The ideal pentagon shown in Figure 4 is not very symmetric; its sides appear
to have different lengths, even though they are all infinitely long in the hyperbolic
plane itself. To make this intuition precise, we cut off the corners of the polygon
using some additional curves called horocycles; see Figure 5. In the Poincaré
disc, a horocycle is a circle tangent to the circle at infinity. Then for any side
or diagonal of the ideal polygon, we may measure its length between the two
horocycles. This allows us to compute a finite number, called the lambda length
of the arc, after the Greek letter λ (lambda): if ℓ is the hyperbolic length of
one of the bold curves in Figure 5, then the corresponding lambda length is eℓ
if the horocycles do not intersect and e−ℓ if they do.
    Now something magical happens: these lambda lengths once again satisfy
Ptolemy’s theorem! Thus, just as for ordinary circumscribed polygons in the
plane, if we fix a triangulation of the ideal polygon and a set of horocycles at
its corners, the length of every diagonal in the polygon may be computed from
the lengths of the arcs in the initial triangulation by flipping.


3 Teichmüller space

Our next question is the following: what are all the possible values of the lambda
lengths of an n-sided ideal polygon in the hyperbolic plane? To answer this, we
label the corners of our ideal n-gon by the numbers 1 to n (clockwise), and let
λij denote the lambda length of the geodesic from corner i to corner j. The set
of all possible values of the λij , from all possible ideal n-gons and choices of
horocycles, is called the decorated Teichmüller space of ideal n-sided polygons.
The adjective “decorated” refers to the fact that we choose the horocycles as


                                         4
Figure 5 : Horocycles at the corners of an ideal pentagon. These allow us
          to assign finite lengths to the sides or diagonals of the pentagon
          by measuring the signed distance along the curve between the two
          horocycles, shown here in bold.


well as just the polygon. Each “point” in this decorated Teichmüller space is a
list of numbers which encodes information about a particular ideal n-gon and
collection of horocycles. Of course, not just any list of numbers will do.
    In general, a Teichmüller space is an example of a moduli space, a space
whose points encode all the possible structures or configurations of some type of
mathematical object. More specifically, a Teichmüller space is a moduli space
of complex or hyperbolic structures, which can be thought of as coordinate
systems. Often, moduli spaces have spaces have recognisable structures of their
own. For instance, the Teichmüller space of nice coordinate systems on the
torus can be seen as the upper half of the complex plane C.
    To work out what this particular decorated Teichmüller space is, we first
observe that for any four distinct numbers i, j, k, and ℓ appearing in this order
clockwise around the bounding circle, the polynomial equation

                           λik λjℓ = λij λkℓ + λℓi λjk

must hold, because of Ptolemy’s theorem. For example, for ideal quadrilaterals,
the only such equation is λ13 λ24 = λ12 λ34 + λ14 λ23 .
   However, not every solution to these equations gives a valid set of lambda
lengths: for example, the values λ13 = λ24 = −1, λ12 = λ34 = 1, λ14 = 0,
and λ23 = −8 satisfy the single equation when n = 4, but these cannot be the
lambda lengths of an ideal quadrilateral since some of them are negative (or
zero), and hence these values do not give us a point in Teichmüller space. So in
addition to the equations coming from Ptolemy’s theorem, we also require that
the length λij ≥ 0 for all vertices i and j of the n-gon. Similarly, Ptolemy’s
equations have solutions involving complex numbers, but these also cannot
represent lengths, and so we want to restrict to real number solutions.


                                       5
                                    λ24




                                                  λ13




Figu r e 6 : The Teichmüller space of ideal quadrilaterals with sides of length 1
           is the set of positive real solutions to the equation λ13 λ24 = 2, that
           is, the upper-right piece of the plot.


   These turn out to be all the conditions we need: that is, the Teichmüller
space of ideal n-gons is exactly the set of all real and positive solutions to
Ptolemy’s equations. While we have explained above why these conditions are
necessary, it is not obvious that any real and positive solution to Ptolemy’s
equations actually arises as the set of lambda lengths of an ideal n-gon, but
this is nevertheless true.
   In particular, the decorated Teichmüller space of ideal quadrilaterals consists
exactly of real and positive solutions to the equation λ13 λ24 = λ12 λ34 + λ14 λ23 .
We cannot easily draw this set, since it lives in a six-dimensional space, but
Figure 6 shows the set of real solutions for which λ12 = λ23 = λ34 = λ41 = 1.
This consists of two disconnected pieces, but only in one of them are the values
λ13 and λ24 positive, and so this piece is the decorated Teichmüller space of
ideal quadrilaterals with sides of length 1.


4 Computing with flips

If n is larger than 4, we are presented with a system of many equations. To help
us find real and positive solutions practically, it is useful to change perspective
slightly. As we discussed in Section 2, once we know the lambda lengths of
the arcs in a triangulation of the n-gon, all of the others can be computed by
flipping diagonals and applying one of Ptolemy’s equations.
    With this in mind, we pick a triangulation of the n-gon, which we call T; a
simple example is shown in Figure 7. Any triangulation consists of 2n − 3 arcs
(including the sides of the n-gon), and so we get a list of 2n − 3 positive real
numbers, that is, a point in R2n−3
                                 >0 , by taking the lambda lengths of just the
arcs in T and forgetting the rest.


                                          6
                                              1


                               6

                                                      2
                              5


                                                  3
                                   4




                F i g u r e 7 : A triangulation of an ideal hexagon.


   Now we try to reverse this procedure: given a list of 2n − 3 positive real
numbers, can we find an ideal n-gon such that the arcs in T have precisely these
numbers as lambda lengths?
   If T contains the arc from corner i to j, let’s write ℓij for the lambda length
we wish to give it. All together, we have 2n − 3 of these initial lengths ℓij . We
can use these to compute the remaining lambda lengths, one at a time. Since
none of the arcs in T cross each other, none of Ptolemy’s equations involve
only the lambda lengths of these arcs, and so these equations do not put any
constraints on our choice of initial lengths ℓij . Instead, as in Section 2, by
repeated flipping we can deduce what the lambda lengths of all the other arcs
in the n-gon must be in terms of the desired lengths ℓij for the arcs in T. As
discussed in Section 3, we just have to check that Ptolemy’s equations do not
force some of these other values to be zero, negative, or even complex.
   However, this turns out not to be an issue. When applying Ptolemy’s
equation (y = αγ+βδ
                  x   ) to compute a new length after a flip, we already know
the values on the right-hand side, and want to compute the remaining value y.
But the expression only involves multiplication, addition, and division, and so y
must be real and positive when the other values are. For example, starting from
the triangulation in Figure 7, we compute that

                           λ12 λ34 + λ23 λ14   ℓ12 ℓ34 + ℓ23 ℓ14
                   λ24 =                     =                   ,
                                  λ13                 ℓ13


and so λ24 is again real and positive, because all of our chosen values ℓij are.
Continuing in this way, we see that our computations will never leave the set of
positive real numbers. It is thus at least plausible that there is an ideal n-gon
with the correct lambda lengths, and with a bit more work, one can prove that
such an n-gon really exists. We may thus summarise this result as follows.


                                          7
Theorem. Each triangulation T of an n-gon determines a one-to-one corre-
spondence between points in the decorated Teichmüller space of ideal n-gons and
points in the set R2n−3
                   >0   of lists of 2n − 3 positive real numbers.
   To illustrate the theorem in the quadrilateral case, we again look at Figure 6,
in which the upper right part of the plot is the Teichmüller space of ideal
quadrilaterals with sides of length 1. Since n = 4, we want to show that the
decorated Teichmüller space corresponds to R5>0 , and if we fix the four lambda
lengths of the sides of the quadrilateral to 1, that leaves only one degree of
freedom. For our triangulation T, we have to decide between using the diagonal
from 1 to 3 or that from 2 to 4. In the first case, we associate a point in the
Teichmüller space to its λ13 coordinate, which is a positive real number. In the
second, we instead associate the point to its λ24 coordinate. In either case, we
produce a one-to-one correspondence between the Teichmüller space and the
positive real line R>0 , as the theorem predicts.


5 Fur ther reading

The decorated Teichmüller space (not just of a disc, but also of a more compli-
cated surface with boundary) was defined by Robert Penner [7, 8], who proved
in general that this space is in one-to-one correspondence with RN  >0 , where N is
the number of arcs needed to triangulate the surface. Ptolemy’s equations are
examples of exchange relations in Fomin and Zelevinsky’s cluster algebras [3], a
much bigger family of equations with positivity properties like those we used in
Section 4. The connection between cluster algebras and Teichmüller space has
been developed further by Gekhtman, Shapiro, and Vainshtein in [5], Fock and
Goncharov in [1], and Fomin, Shapiro, and Thurston in [2].
   Solutions to Ptolemy’s equations over the positive integers (whole numbers),
or equivalently decorated ideal n-gons with integer lambda lengths, are very
closely related to frieze patterns, the subject of an earlier snapshot [6]. Indeed,
a frieze pattern with n − 1 rows, as in [6, Fig. 3], is one way of representing an
integer point in the Teichmüller space of ideal n-gons.




                                        8
I m a g e credits

Figure 4 ( r i gh t ) “H2 Checkers 334”. Author: Antonissimo. Entered into the
       public domain via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
       wiki/File:H2checkers_334.png, visited on January 12, 2026.


R e f e rences

[1] V. V. Fock and A. B. Goncharov, Cluster ensembles, quantization and
    the dilogarithm, Annales Scientifiques de l’École Normale Supérieure.
    Quatrième Série 42 (2009), no. 6, 865–930, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
    978-0-8176-4745-2_15.
[2] S. Fomin, M. Shapiro, and D. Thurston, Cluster algebras and triangulated
    surfaces. I. Cluster complexes, Acta Mathematica 201 (2008), no. 1, 83–146,
    https://doi.org/10.1007/s11511-008-0030-7.
[3] S. Fomin and A. Zelevinsky, Cluster algebras I: Foundations, Journal of the
    American Mathematical Society 15 (2002), no. 2, 497–529, http://dx.doi.
    org/10.1090/S0894-0347-01-00385-X.

[4] H. Gangl, Jewellery from tessellations of hyperbolic space, Snapshots of
    modern mathematics from Oberwolfach (2022), no. 05, https://doi.org/10.
    14760/SNAP-2022-005-EN.
[5] M. Gekhtman, M. Shapiro, and A. Vainshtein, Cluster algebras and Weil–
    Petersson forms, Duke Mathematical Journal 127 (2005), no. 2, 291–311,
    https://doi.org/10.1215/S0012-7094-04-12723-X.
[6] T. Holm, Friezes and tilings, Snapshots of modern mathematics from Ober-
    wolfach (2015), no. 04, https://doi.org/10.14760/SNAP-2015-004-EN.
[7] R. C. Penner, Decorated Teichmüller theory of bordered surfaces, Com-
    munications in Analysis and Geometry 12 (2004), no. 4, 793–820, http:
    //projecteuclid.org/euclid.cag/1098468019.
[8]        , Decorated Teichmüller theory, QGM Master Class Series, European
      Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, 2012, https://doi.org/10.4171/075.




                                      9
Matth ew P r e s s l a n d i s a Maître de       License
Confé r e n c e s a t t h e Université de Caen   Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0
Nor m a n d i e.
                                                 DOI
Mathe m a t i c a l s u b j e c ts               10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 4 - E N
Algeb ra a n d N u m b e r Theor y, Geometr y
and To p o l o g y




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r                              Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Lael E d wa r d s - C o s t a                    Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de               Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                 77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                              Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e                Director
                                                 Gerhard H u i s ke n
