AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society
AMS Website Down
Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm.
PDFLINK
Conversation
History, Identity, and Ownership in Mathematics: A Response to Minhyong Kim
Reviel Netz
Communicated by
Notices
Associate Editor Adrian C. Rice
Figure 1
.
By unknown author—Engraving from
Mechanic’s Magazine
(cover of bound Volume II, Knight & Lacey, London, 1824).
Writing with his usual elegance and wisdom, Minhyong Kim advances the question “Who owns the past?”⁠
Footnote
1
A timely question indeed, and it is remarkable that this question seems to be more and more debated, even as everyone around us cares less and less about history. Perhaps the paradox is easy to explain: as humanity loses interest in its past, and instead it is on the present that it fixes its undivided attention, so it follows the past would get a mention for this alone: for how it impinges upon the present. And so history, inevitably, becomes yet another arena in which to enact our contemporary political debates.
1
Minhyong Kim,
History, Identity, and Ownership in Mathematics
, Notices of the American Mathematical Society
72
(2025), no. 8.
✖
How indeed should history play a role in contemporary political debates? Kim and I share, it seems, many of the same values. His conclusion is one I can heartily endorse:
“A tradition belongs to whomever studies it carefully and thereby lays claim to it.”
If I have anything to add, this reflects my different professional perspective. Kim is a mathematician and, to him, the question “Who owns the mathematical past?” is significant for what it means for his global community of mathematicians and for the practical concerns of mathematical education. I am not a mathematician, but a historian. To be clear: Kim knows his history very well, so I have little to add to his facts. But I care about certain things more than he does. In particular, while both Kim and I care a lot about history, my care for the
profession
of history is personal. What matters to me is that we, in fact, do need to know the past,
for its own sake
. This is because it is not merely a store of stories we can tell about present values. Instead, the past is also the defining feature of human reality: we are a historical species. We live in a world shaped by a particular historical trajectory, and we cannot approach anything about human society—science and mathematics included—as if it were “timeless.”
With this preamble, then, let us look at some history.
Kim clears away many misunderstandings concerning the legacy of Greek mathematics. The sense in which it ever was “Greek” is extremely qualified, and it is truly wild to suggest that it was “European.” To restate his main points from my own perspective: first of all, the notion of “Greeks” seems to invoke, for many modern readers, a notion of “nation” or “ethnicity” that is simply inapplicable in the ancient context. In a very rapid shorthand we can say that “the Greeks” defeated “the Persians” and were in turn defeated by “the Romans,” and it is even possible to find ancient Greeks, and Romans, using similar language, but what the ancients meant by words such as “the Greeks” is not what we do. This is a matter not of word choice, but of historical reality. Greek elites did not view themselves, under the Romans, as colonial subjects. They were, instead, stakeholders of an empire. This is because of a difference in the very nature of the “nation.” The modern notion of the “nation” involves a tight, unique relationship between the elite and its local masses. Nowadays to be “French” means to be committed to an identity shared by all citizens of the Republic. Something similar was true, to some extent, of the ancient identity of, say, “Athenian” (though the commitment of Athenian elites to the city project was always rather tenuous, by modern standards). Nothing of the kind was ever true for “Greek.” Ancient elites had strong ties to each other, often overriding the ties they felt towards their local masses. The word “Greek,” as a pointer to a reality in the history of culture, refers, above all, to a specific way of being a member of a certain elite. This cultural definition, finally, is not some modern construct, but is instead a significant, stable ancient reality. From about 400 BCE to 200 CE, many elite members across the Mediterranean were taught the same Greek literary canon—Homer, the Athenian tragedians, Plato, etc.—and went through the same grammatical and rhetorical education. As the centuries progressed, more and more of those educated in this way did not come from originally Greek-speaking stock (many, indeed, spoke Latin).
And so, while I agree with Kim that we need to qualify the sense in which “Greek mathematics” was “Greek,” I am a bit more optimistic than him about our ability to breathe historical life into the notion. It is not just the absolutely trivial, accidental fact of language. The thing we call “Greek mathematics” emerged embedded within a certain education, within a certain expectation of what literature should accomplish—and Greek mathematics, we must remember, emerged, to begin with, as a highly specialized literary genre. It is important, then, that this literary canon was formed in the Democratic city of Athens—and then preserved, essentially unchanged, by the elites of later Mediterranean monarchies. An important historical paradox: more on this below.
As for the question whether Greek mathematics was “European,” one is at a loss even to provide this statement with a meaningful interpretation. I can perhaps add this to Kim’s observations. “Greek mathematics” is in my view best understood as a literary genre: one characterized by its definite use of a certain formulaic language, its definite way of deploying diagrams. The genre is easily translatable: the formulaic language can be transferred to the vocabulary of any other language with its overall shape remaining intact, while the use of diagrams is obviously nonlinguistic. This makes it possible to raise a question: what is the language in which the most Greek mathematical texts were written? I suspect that the correct answer is “Arabic.”
And so: a particular style of writing mathematics took shape within a particular educational environment. The environment having changed, the style remained. It was pursued for about two millennia, mostly around the Mediterranean, mostly in languages other than the one in which it originally emerged. In Western and Atlantic Europe of the 17th–18th centuries, this style went through important transformations that gave rise to what we now identify as modern mathematics, currently pursued everywhere around the globe.
Why should we care?
To begin with, because many people do. The comments sections of online discussions of the history of mathematics quickly become clogged with nationalistic and racist claims, clamoring from all sides to claim mathematics as their own. It is important to rebut such chauvinism, both because it is bad history and because it comes from, and bolsters, bad politics. Now, a certain amount of national pride is acceptable, perhaps even valuable. I personally take pride, for instance, in the fact that Scarlett Johannson is Jewish, even as I realize the irrationality of such pride (our coethnicity does not endow me with any acting skills). Briefly, there’s no harm in fandom, and I think Greek people living today have every right, if they so wish, to become fans of Euclid or Archimedes and to cheer these authors as members of their own team. Indeed, I welcome everyone to do so. This positive engagement is all for the good. The danger is in the negative, implied claim that others do
not
have a right to the same patrimony. At its worst, such negative sentiments become the explicit racist position that advances in science were made by “white” people and that those are superior to “nonwhite.” This is what Kim refutes, with elegance and wisdom, and obviously I concur.
For this reason, it is useful to note—as Kim does—that the “Greek” descriptor in “Greek mathematics” does not refer to an ethnicity. It is, instead (I would say), a shorthand for a particular style that developed in a particular educational environment which, right from the beginning, reached across ethnic borders. It is also worth adding that this style of doing mathematics did achieve a lot—but, at the same time, that many of its achievements should be attributed not to the style of Greek mathematics taken on its own, but to its combinations with traditions other than the Greek. It was never
just
Greek. One such synthesis—of Greek mathematics with Babylonian knowledge about the stars—gave rise to the Ptolemaic style of astronomy. Another such synthesis—of Greek mathematics with Arabic practices of calculation (ultimately, once again, going back to Babylonian roots)—gave rise to algebra. Modern science emerged from Greek mathematics, for sure, in the expanded sense that also includes quantitative planetary models, algebraic equations, and more (and also included many efforts to recover what was believed to be the lost ancient knowledge—a serendipitous quest that often landed on new, original discoveries, most notably, of course, the invention of modern analysis). The most precise statement is that modern science emerged from widely shared Mediterranean practices, that tended to coalesce around the Greek style of doing mathematics.
Kim and I believe in the ideals of the Enlightenment—such as universal human solidarity—and we see science as an endeavor that goes hand in hand with such ideals. We shudder when people hijack this history of science to promote racism. It is therefore only natural that we both agree to the following negative claim: the use of “Greek mathematics” to promote a racist ideology is based on bad history.
This negative claim is necessary and important. I feel that we ought to be able to do even better and make a positive claim: the history of science, properly understood, should be seen to
promote
the ideals of the Enlightenment.
To repeat: I believe that history is not merely a store of stories carrying their morals. History, instead, is essential for understanding human reality. Kim starts with the question of whether or not the history of science is homogeneous: are things always the same, or is there a diversity in science? It seems that, for him, the main observation driving the value of history is that of diversity: science differs from place to place, from time to time, and it is therefore illuminating to learn this pattern of diversity. I would emphasize a stronger claim: science is not merely diverse but also
contingent
. While the facts discovered by science and mathematics are true regardless of the contingent history through which they were found, there are effectively infinitely many of them. There therefore must be a contingent history of how we end up knowing this finite subset and not another, in which order we come to know this subset, and, finally, how we package the individual facts into meaningful structures of knowledge.
The alternative—a deterministic view of history—in a sense makes history irrelevant. This is why this matters so much to me as a historian. To explain: there is a possible model according to which any intelligent species must land on the same science, roughly in the same sequence and at the same pace. There is just a natural order of scientific discovery. This kind of determinism means that there is not exactly a “history” of science, merely the unfolding in time of what is fundamentally composed of timeless truths. This viewpoint is rarely articulated, so I am not sure how many people subscribe to this precise model. Let me just say that I think it is entirely wrong and that knowledge could have developed in myriad directions or even have failed to develop at all.
We know this, because so much of our own science would have been inconceivable without the input of Greek mathematics, and because Greek mathematics was a tiny outlier. It consisted of a few hundred individuals, active mostly in two generational bursts (in the early fourth century and late third century BCE), responsible for most of the creative ideas. An alternative history, without the kind of science that we are familiar with, can be envisaged, because such an alternative account describes the vast part of human history.
Further, while Greek mathematicians were but a handful, they did emerge from a larger setting, that of a certain type of Greek education, based on the Athenian canon. And this, too, was a historical outlier. My claim is that it was a culture built on the legacy of the Greek democratic experiment—a unique moment of relative egalitarianism, popular government, of citizens becoming masters of their own fate. This is not irrelevant for the style of Greek mathematics—organized around principles such as proof, persuasion, and maximal individual originality.
The claim, then, is, in brief, that in the absence of Greek democracy, there could have been no science of the kind we now recognize.
Caveats abound. The streams running into modern science, even considering just the Mediterranean, are, as noted, multiple; and the relation of what I define as “Greek culture” to democracy was complex and ambivalent. And yet the claim holds. Without the Greek democratic experiment, there is no reason to believe that a literary system would have emerged with its canon based on the figure of the individual author. (Other literatures often have divine, nameless literary canons.) Certainly, the centrality of proof and persuasion in Greek mathematics came directly from Greek political realities. Every culture has the capacity to produce and understand proof; only the Greeks made it the overriding principle driving everything else in their science. Of course, very few Greeks were mathematicians. Which underlines the contingency. It all depended upon a few hundred authors, in a couple of historical moments, perhaps inspired by no more than a handful of individual accidents—all of it in a unique, precarious historical context.
And that’s how we end up having what we now call science. We are downstream from a moment that happened, and needn’t have. And, among other things, we should be grateful to Greek democracy for that.
This, then, is another valid story that we can tell based on the history of science. It has a moral that bolsters the ideals of the Enlightenment. It does not merely assert the negative claim, that racist histories of science are wrong, but adds to this a positive claim—emphasizing the role of freedom, social and individual, for the making of science.
I think it is important that we tell such positive stories. What we seek, I believe, is a form of Enlightenment patriotism. I believe that both Kim and I see in science, and in its history, a model for a patriotism for humanity, transcending borders: a sense of human solidarity based on pride in universal human achievement. To build this kind of solidarity, it is indeed important to refute any particularist, chauvinist telling of the history of science. But patriotism is not built on negativity. We need to tell the positive story of human progress, and I am afraid that we have become, recently, reluctant to do so.
Like many of my colleagues today, I, too, feel this negative instinct to debunk stories of European exceptionalism—an instinct made necessary because we are all too aware of the way such stories could be hijacked by racist narratives. What I find is that, fixated on this negative concern, our positive narratives become timid and pale. If anything—under the banner of “decolonization”—what’s on offer often fosters parochial notions of humanity as a set of adversaries. And all too often, under the banner of “critical theory,” what’s on offer fosters skepticism, indeed cynicism, toward the very notion of an arc of human progress.
Kim is correct to see mathematics as the very model of such arcs of progress, sustained—right from the beginning—by a shared network of global collaboration. He tells the story of the “Babylonian algorithm,” implicit and narrow in its original application, gradually evolving through ever-growing cycles of generalization so as to culminate—four thousand years later—in “How to find all roots of complex polynomials by Newton’s method.” It is right that we relate the history of mathematics to be an uplifting narrative of progress and generalization. And we should not shy away from generalizing such narratives beyond the history of mathematics itself.
Kim cites a disturbing statement by Jefferson.⁠
Footnote
2
I think it is worthwhile to cite, alongside that disturbing statement, another one, also by Jefferson, one well-worn but not any the worse for wear:
2
Cited in Kim: “Comparing them [blacks] by their faculties of memory, reason, and imagination, it appears to me, that in memory they are equal to the whites; in reason much inferior, as think one could scarcely be found capable of tracing and comprehending the investigations of Euclid.”
✖
“We hold [this] truth[s] to be self-evident, that all men are created equal.”
This is an interesting statement for the historian of mathematics. First of all, it is formally an axiom, a reflection of the style of writing
more geometrico
of early modernity. Here, as in other ways: if not Euclid, then no Jefferson. Indeed, it is not irrelevant that so many of Euclid’s Common Notions articulate the concept of
equality
, and it is perfectly conceivable that Jefferson’s mind—as he was trying to found political truth on a bedrock of certainty—could have considered, specifically, a Euclidean model. Further, a mathematician cannot help but notice that the two statements quoted from Jefferson—the one quoted by Kim and the one quoted by me—flagrantly contradict each other. Indeed, this is all in the spirit of Lakatos’ observations on the way in which concepts tend to evolve and expand through the pressure of logical questioning. In the thick of history, all is contradictory—and the dialectic of resolving such contradictions is the engine of progress. We should see people like Jefferson for what they always were: flawed, limited authors of, so to speak, not-yet-general Babylonian algorithms. It took thousands of years for partial Babylonian algorithms to become the fully general 2001 theorem “How to find all roots of complex polynomials by Newton’s method.” This takes intense work. Similarly, it will take intense work to make “all men are created equal” fully refer to “all humans.” Such remains our task.
Reviel Netz is Patrick Suppes Professor of Greek Mathematics and Astronomy at Stanford University. His email address is
[email protected]
.
Article DOI:
10.1090/noti3238
Credits
Figure 1 is courtesy of the Annenberg Rare Book & Manuscript Library, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA, public domain,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=16887615
.
Photo of Reviel Netz is courtesy of Maya Arad.