

 AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society 

 Skip to main content 

 Donate Now 

 Sign
 in 

 Sign
 in 
 New
 to AMS? 
 Register now. 
 Your Account 
 Your
 Purchases 
 Your
 Donations 
 Your
 Member Directory Listing 

 Register
 for a Meeting 
 AMS
 Member Directory 
 Sign
 out 

 MathSciNet 
 Bookstore 
 My Cart 
 Help 

 Menu 

 Menu 

 Publications 

 Publications Home Over 100 years of publishing excellence 
 Books 

 AMS Bookstore 
 Rights, Licensing, Permissions 

 Open Math Notes 
 AMS Digital Library 

 Journals 
 eBook Collections 

 Author Resource Center 
 Librarian Resources 

 COUNTER Usage Statistics 
 Subscription Information 
 Licensing Information 
 My Titles 

 Mathematical Reviews/MathSciNet® 

 MathSciNet® 
 Reviewer Home 
 MathSciNet® Subscriptions 

 Membership 

 Membership Home Welcome to your membership center 

 Membership Choices 

 Join the Society 
 Renew your Membership 
 Gift a Membership 

 Individual Membership 

 Member Benefits 
 Member Directory 
 Reciprocating Societies 
 Members in Developing Countries 

 Institutional Membership 

 Domestic Institutions 
 International Institutions 
 Two-Year Institutions 
 Graduate Student Chapter Program 

 Other Member Types 

 Corporate Memberships 
 Associate Memberships 

 Meetings & Conferences 

 Meetings & Conferences Home Engage with colleagues and the latest research 

 National Meetings 

 Joint Mathematics Meetings 
 Upcoming JMMs 
 Previous JMMs 
 Special Lectures 
 Professional Enhancement Programs (PEPs) 

 Sectional Meetings 

 Upcoming Sectionals 
 Previous Sectionals 
 Presenting Papers 
 Hosting Sectionals 

 Other Meetings, Conferences & Workshops 

 International Meetings 
 Mathematics Calendar 
 Short Courses 

 Meetings Resources 

 Suggest a Speaker 
 AMS Meetings Grants 
 Submitting Abstracts 
 Welcoming Environment Policy 
 MathSafe – supporting safe meetings 

 News & Outreach 

 News & Outreach Home Explore news, images, posters, and mathematical essays 

 News from the AMS 

 Feature Stories 
 Information for Journalists 
 In Memoriam 

 Math Voices 

 Feature Column 
 Math in the Media 
 Column on Teaching and Learning 

 Explorations 

 Recognizing Diverse Mathematicians 
 AMS Posters 
 Mathematics & Music 
 Mathematical Imagery 
 Mathematical Moments 

 Grants & Awards 

 Grants & Awards Home Resources and opportunities to further your mathematical pursuits 

 Grants 

 AMS Backstop Grants 
 Research & Travel Grants 
 Child Care Grants for Meetings 
 Young Scholars Program Grants 

 Honors & Awards 

 Awards 
 Fellows of the AMS 

 AMS Fellowships 

 Stefan Bergman Fellowship 
 Birman Fellowship 
 Centennial Fellowship 
 Claytor-Gilmer Fellowship 

 Learning & Careers 

 Learning & Careers Home Resources to support advanced mathematics teaching and learning 

 For Students 

 High School 
 Undergraduate 
 Graduate 
 Find Graduate Programs 
 Math Alliance at the AMS 

 For Faculty & Leaders 

 Department Chairs Workshop 
 Column on Teaching & Learning 
 Math in the Media 
 Salary & Departmental Data 

 Jobs 

 Employment Services 
 MathJobs 
 BEGIN Careers 

 Professional Development 

 Mathematics Research Communities 
 Mathematical Opportunities Listing 
 MathPrograms 

 Government Relations 

 Government Relations Home Advocating for the mathematical sciences 

 Elevating Mathematics in Congress 

 Letters, Statements, & Legislation 
 Congressional Briefings 

 Legislative Priorities 

 Federal Issues of Concern 
 Federal Budget Process 

 Get Involved 

 Advocacy Resources 
 Contact Us 

 DC-Based Fellowships 

 Congressional Fellowship 
 Mass Media Fellowship 
 Catalyzing Advocacy in Science & Engineering (CASE) Fellowship 

 Giving 

 Giving to the AMS Your gifts make great things happen for mathematics 

 What You Can Support 

 The 2020 Fund 
 Next Generation Fund 
 Birman Fellowship for Women Scholars 
 JMM Child Care Grants 
 Mathematics Research Communities 
 MathSciNet for Developing Countries 

 Create a Legacy 

 Make a Tribute Gift 
 Create a Permanent Fund 
 Establish a Prize, Award or Fellowship 
 Bequests and Charitable Estate Planning 

 Honoring Your Gift 

 Donor Stories 
 Donor Wall of Honor 
 Thomas S. Fiske Society 
 AMS Contributors Society 
 AMS Gardens 

 Giving Resources 

 AMS Development Committee 
 AMS Gift Acceptance Policy 
 Contact Us 
 Donate Now 

 About the AMS 

 About the AMS Advancing research. Connecting the mathematics community 

 Our Organization 

 Accessibility 
 Equal Opportunity and Fairness 
 Jobs at AMS 
 Contact Us 
 Customer Service 

 Leadership 

 Executive Staff 
 Officers 
 Board of Trustees 
 Council 
 Executive Committee 
 Presidents 
 Committees 

 Governance Operations 

 Bylaws 
 Elections 
 Calendar of Meetings 
 Policy Statements & Guidelines 

 MathSciNet 
 Bookstore 
 Your Account 

 AMS Website Down 
 Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm. 

 Home 
 Notices of the American Mathematical Society 

 Notices of the American Mathematical Society 
 Welcome to the Notices of the American Mathematical Society . With support from AMS membership , we are pleased to share the journal with the global mathematical community. 

 PDFLINK 

 News 
 Mathematics People 

 Fukaya Wins 2025 Shaw Prize 

 Kenji Fukaya has been awarded the 2025 Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences “for his pioneering work on symplectic geometry, especially for envisioning the existence of a category—nowadays called the Fukaya category—consisting of Lagrangians on a symplectic manifold, for leading the monumental task of constructing it, and for his subsequent ground-breaking and impactful contributions to symplectic topology, mirror symmetry, and gauge theory.” 
 Since 2024, Fukaya has been a professor at the Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications (BIMSA) and the Yau Mathematical Sciences Center (YMSC), Tsinghua University. He received his PhD in 1986 from the University of Tokyo under the direction of Ichiro Tamura. He has taught at the University of Tokyo and Kyoto University, and in 2013 became a permanent member of the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. Fukaya is a member of the Japan Academy. 
 The Shaw Prize Foundation awards three annual prizes in Astronomy, Life Sciences and Medicine, and Mathematical Sciences, each bearing a prize of US$1.2 million. The prizes, which have been awarded for 22 years, will be presented to the Shaw Prize Laureates at a ceremony on October 21, 2025, in Hong Kong. 
 — AMS Communications 

 National Academy of Science Elects 10 Scholars 

 Ten scholars from the mathematical sciences were elected to the National Academy of Sciences, as announced on April 29, 2025, “in recognition of their distinguished and continuing achievements in original research.” 
 Newly elected members and their affiliations at the time of election: 

 • Adrienne L. Fairhall, professor of physiology and biophysics, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, and adjunct professor of applied mathematics, Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington 
 • Ravindran Kannan, distinguished visiting scientist, Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing, University of California, Berkeley 
 • Fang-Hua Lin, Silver Professor of Mathematics, Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University; AMS member, AMS Fellow 
 • Jun S. Liu, professor of statistics, Department of Statistics, Harvard University 
 • Sorin Popa, professor and Takesaki Endowed Chair in Operator Algebras, Mathematics Department, University of California, Los Angeles; AMS member, AMS Fellow 
 • Scott Sheffield, Leighton Family Professor of Mathematics, Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
 • Lloyd N. Trefethen, professor of applied mathematics in residence, Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University; AMS member, AMS Fellow 
 • Melanie Matchett Wood, William Caspar Graustein Professor of Mathematics, Department of Mathematics, Harvard University; AMS member, AMS Fellow 

 Newly elected international members, their affiliations at the time of election, and their country of citizenship: 

 • Sergiu Hart, professor emeritus of mathematics and economics, Hebrew University of Jerusalem (Israel); AMS member 
 • Maryna S. Viazovska, full professor and Chair of Number Theory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland (Ukraine) 

 The newly elected scholars bring the total number of active members to 2,662 and the total number of international members to 556. 
 A private, nonprofit institution, the National Academy of Sciences was established in 1863 under a congressional charter signed by President Abraham Lincoln. It recognizes achievement in science by election to membership. With the National Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of Medicine, it provides science, engineering, and health policy advice to the federal government and other organizations. 
 — AMS Communications 

 Nominate for Math of AI Prize 

 The Association for Mathematical Research is soliciting nominations for the second annual Prize in the Mathematics of Artificial Intelligence. The prize will be awarded in 2025 for research performed in the last 10 years in mathematics relevant to artificial intelligence and machine learning, or in AI research relevant to mathematics. The prize will include a cash award of $50,000. 
 Nomination letters should be sent to [email protected] . They should include a brief note describing the qualifications of the nominee as well as the research for which the prize could be awarded. Letters should be received by September 30, 2025, to assure consideration. 
 — Association for Mathematical Research 

 Interlace Journal to Publish 

 Two American Mathematical Society (AMS) Life members who are familiar faces in math/fiber arts circles have founded Interlace: A journal of mathematics and fiber arts . 
 “We are excited to offer a journal that has as its focus work at the intersection of mathematics and fiber arts,” said Carolyn Yackel of Mercer University, cofounder and coeditor-in-chief. “We think that the field has now grown to a size that can support a specialized journal.” 
 Added sarah-marie belcastro of Bryn Mawr College, cofounder and coeditor-in-chief, “After many years of editorial work on books and for other journals, we are happy to increase access to new mathematical fiber arts work by making the journal completely free and open-access.” 
 belcastro and Yackel have worked at the interface of mathematics and fiber arts at least since the 1990s when they attended mathematics graduate school at the University of Michigan. After publishing three edited volumes and one journal special issue of papers in this area, they finally heeded the suggestion to start a journal made by Elizabeth Wilmer in her 2020 Notices review of their book Figuring Fibers . 
 The pair expects to publish approximately one volume or issue of Interlace annually. They currently seek submissions for the inaugural issue, to be published in spring 2026. 
 Interlace will focus on novel investigations and analyses of the mathematics within and inspired by fiber arts, they said. This includes mathematical modeling of particular fiber artifacts or aspects of a fiber art; using mathematics to solve a problem presented in working on a fiber arts project; describing the process of accurately crafting a mathematical object; detailed descriptions of the mathematics within completed fiber arts pieces that illustrate mathematics; and the incorporation of mathematics in fiber arts project design. 
 Fiber artists in the math community might know belcastro and Yackel as the founders of the Knitting Circle at the Joint Mathematics Meetings, which they have co-organized annually since 2001. 
 “If you talk about the Knitting Circle in your article, please be sure to make it clear that this relaxed event is for people practicing any kind of fiber art or other crafts, including origami,” Yackel said. “Some participants practice their craft, while others attend to socialize.” 
 — AMS Communications 

 Yepremyan Awarded Artin Prize 

 Liana Yepremyan, assistant professor of mathematics, Emory University, has been awarded the 2025 Emil Artin Junior Prize in Mathematics for her paper (with Bryce Frederickson) “Vector space Ramsey numbers and weakly Sidorenko affine configurations,” Quarterly Journal of Mathematics 76 (2025), no. 1, 77–94. 
 Established in 2001, the Emil Artin Junior Prize in Mathematics is awarded under the auspices of the Armenian Mathematical Union and carries a cash prize of US$1,500. It is presented usually every year to a student or former student of an Armenian educational institution who received their doctoral degree in the last 10 years for outstanding contributions to algebra, geometry, topology, and number theory: the fields in which Artin made major contributions. 
 — Emil Artin Junior Prize Committee 

 NITMB Appoints Hibdon 

 The NSF-Simons National Institute for Theory and Math in Biology (NITMB) announced the appointment of Joseph E. Hibdon Jr. as the inaugural Rotating Associate Director for Convening Programs. Hibdon joined NITMB from Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU), where he served as an associate professor in the mathematics department. An AMS member, he has been an active member of NITMB and has advised on outreach programs since its inception. 
 NITMB aims to integrate the disciplines of mathematics and biology to transform the practice of biological research and to inspire new mathematical discoveries. The mission of NITMB is to create a nationwide collaborative research community that will generate new mathematical results and uncover the “rules of life” through theories, data-informed mathematical models, and computational and statistical tools. 
 NITMB is funded by the National Science Foundation and Simons Foundation and is supported by a partnership between Northwestern University and The University of Chicago. 
 — National Institute for Theory and Math in Biology 

 Article DOI: 10.1090/noti3236 

 Current Issue 
 About Notices 
 From the Secretary 
 Full Issues 
 Features 
 Career 
 Topical Columns 
 Reviews 
 What Is ... 
 Memorials 

 Notices Media Kit 
 Notices Features 
 Author Guidelines 

 Join the AMS

 American Mathematical Society · 201 Charles Street Providence, Rhode Island 02904-2213 · Contact Us 
 AMS, American Mathematical Society, the tri-colored AMS logo, and Advancing research, Creating connections, are trademarks and services marks of the American Mathematical Society and registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 
 © Copyright 2024 American Mathematical Society · View Our Privacy Statement · Terms of Use · Accessibility and AMS Online Content 


