                 CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES

                            FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA

        Abstract. Geodesic ﬂows on closed hyperbolic surfaces are a quintessential
        example of chaotic dynamics, i.e., systems whose long term behavior is very
        sensitive to initial conditions. The speed of such chaos is controlled by the
        spectral gap of the Laplace–Beltrami operator of the underlying hyperbolic
        surface. In this paper we give an overview of recent breakthroughs of Anan-
        tharaman and Monk showing that large genus closed hyperbolic surfaces have
        optimal spectral gap in a probabilistic sense. On the way we introduce and
        discuss the foundational works of many authors, from Selberg to Mirzakhani,
        that play a crucial role in the tour de force proof of Anatharaman and Monk.



                                   1. Introduction
1.1. Chaos. The main purpose of classical mechanics is to study physical systems
that evolve under deterministic laws of motion: knowing the current state of a
system completely determines its future. Although in theory this appears to be a
rather reasonable goal, under further consideration one runs into a practical issue
of the utmost importance: If real life measurements are only an approximation of
the underlying physical quantities, how can one even claim to know the current
state of a system?
   At ﬁrst one might think that this is not really an issue: Good enough approxima-
tions of the initial conditions of a system should lead to reasonable approximations
of the outcome. And although this is certainly true if the equations of motion are
what one calls well-posed, the dependence of the outcomes on the initial conditions
of the system can be quite dramatic. This type of behavior is usually referred to
as chaos.
   And to be emphatic, this is certainly an issue we face in our everyday lives:
How many times have you trusted the weather forecast and left home without an
umbrella only to ﬁnd yourself caught unprepared in the middle of a thunderstorm
only a few hours later? The earth’s atmosphere is a chaotic system, but a rather
complicated one. Although it might seem counterintuitive at ﬁrst, it turns out
that systems with few degrees of freedom can also be chaotic. Perhaps the most
famous example of such a system is given by the Lorenz attractor ; see Figure 1 for
a particular instance of this example.
   In this setting, let us formulate a few questions that will guide our discussion:
      • What mechanisms give rise to chaos?
      • Can we quantify the chaoticity of a system?
      • What controls the speed of chaos?
      • Do systems have a tendency to be more chaotic?
1.2. Hyperbolic surfaces. Certainly, studying these questions in full generality
would be an extremely ambitious goal. So, as we do many times in mathematics,
we will aim at understanding these questions by restricting to a class of concrete toy
models: geodesic ﬂows on closed hyperbolic surfaces. The hope here is that, once
                                             1
2                          FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA




             Figure 1. An instance of the Lorenz attractor [KS12].


we understand these toy models well enough, it should be possible to extrapolate
general principles to more complicated systems. But let us not jump too far ahead
of ourselves. In this survey we will explore the following answers to the questions
above for closed hyperbolic surfaces:

     • What mechanisms give rise to chaos?
       The negative curvature of a closed hyperbolic surface forces the orbits of
       its geodesic ﬂow to drift apart quickly, giving rise to chaotic behavior.
     • Can we quantify the chaoticity of a system?
       The geodesic ﬂow on a closed hyperbolic surface is exponentially mixing,
       i.e., the future and past become independent at exponential speed.
     • What controls the speed of chaos?
       The speed of mixing of the geodesic ﬂow on a closed hyperbolic surface
       is controlled by the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of its Laplace–Beltrami
       operator.
     • Do systems have a tendency to be more chaotic?
       Random large genus closed hyperbolic surfaces have optimal spectral gap.

1.3. Organization. Our main aim in this paper is to discuss the recent break-
throughs of Anantharaman and Monk [AM23, AM24b, AM25] answering the last
question above. Although this work is quite technical, worry not, as we will also
spend time answering the ﬁrst three questions to set up notation and introduce the
subject to the unfamiliar reader.
   In §2 we discuss the basics of hyperbolic surfaces. In §3 we introduce the notion
of chaos we will be interested in: exponential mixing. In §4, following Ratner, we
discuss how the spectrum of the Laplace–Beltrami operator controls the mixing
speed of the geodesic ﬂow of a closed hyperbolic surface. In §5 we introduce the
Selberg trace formula, one of the key ingredients in the work of Anantharaman and
Monk. In §6 we discuss the notion of Weil–Petersson random hyperbolic surface
and Mirzakhani’s foundational work on the subject; this is another key ingredient in
the work of Anantharaman and Monk. Finally, in §7 we give a complete statement
of the main result and describe the new key techniques that make the proof of
Anantharaman and Monk so revolutionary.
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                              3


1.4. Acknowledgments. This expository article was prepared to accompany a
talk given by the author at the Joint Mathematics Meetings in 2026. The author
would like to thank Bianca Viray and Daniel Erman for the invitation to give this
talk. The author would also like to thank Giovanni Forni for many enlightening
conversations.

                            2. Hyperbolic surfaces
2.1. Hyperbolic surfaces. Hyperbolic surfaces are what we call a homogeneous
space, i.e., a space whose local geometry is the same everywhere. In the case of hy-
perbolic surfaces, the local geometry is modeled on the hyperbolic plane. Roughly
speaking, near every point the surface looks like a saddle and the bending of such
saddles is the same across the whole surface. Closed orientable surfaces are com-
pletely classiﬁed by their genus, i.e., the number of holes; see Figure 2 for an
example. In the case of closed hyperbolic surfaces, the genus g is related to the
area A by the Gauss–Bonnet theorem:
                                  A = 4π(g − 1).




                   Figure 2. An orientable surface of genus 2.


Remark 2.1. For the rest of this paper we exclusively consider orientable surfaces
and just refer to them as surfaces, without highlighting their orientability.
  But we are jumping too far ahead of ourselves! Let us spend some time making
some of the basic notions in hyperbolic geometry more precise.
2.2. The hyperbolic plane. The hyperbolic plane can be deﬁned as the upper
half space
                          H := {z ∈ C | (z) > 0}
endowed with the Riemannian metric given by
                                         dx2 + dy 2
                                  g :=              ;
                                             y2
this is nothing more to say than the norm of a tangent vector v := (v1 , v2 ) ∈ R2 at
a point z = x + iy ∈ H is given by
                                         
                                           v12 + v22
                                vz :=              .
                                              y
Endowed with this geometry, the geodesics, i.e., the length minimizing curves, of
H2 are the vertical lines and the half circles of the upper half space with center
along the real axis; see Figure 3 for some examples. As one can measure lengths
on H, one can also measure areas. More explicitly, the corresponding inﬁnitesimal
area element is given by
                                          dxdy
                                    dA =:       .
                                            y2
4                           FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA




            Figure 3. Examples of geodesics on the hyperbolic plane.

   For any of this to make sense, one needs to make sure that the geometry near
every point of H is the same. Said another way, one needs to guarantee that the
group of isometries of H acts transitively on its unit tangent bundle, i.e., has a
single orbit. And indeed that is the case. Furthermore, one can show that, up to
ﬁnite index, the group of orientation preserving isometries of H is given by
                                                                      
                        a b                   
         SL(2, R) :=                          
                                ∈ Mat2×2 (R)  a, b, c, d ∈ R, ab − cd = 1
                         c d
acting by Möbius transformations in the following way:
                              
                           a b          az + b
                                 · z :=        , z ∈ H2 .
                           c d          cz + d
2.3. Negative curvature. Now notice that the geodesics represented in Figure
3 seem to drift apart rather quickly; compare this to the more familiar Euclidean
setting where straight lines that do not intersect always stay at the same distance.
Indeed, one can show that geodesics in H drift away at exponential speed. This
is one of the fundamental manifestations of negative curvature, i.e., the saddle-like
behavior we described at the beginning of this section, and will play a fundamental
role in the rest of our discussion. An important consequence of negative curvature
is the fact that every loop on a closed hyperbolic surface can be freely homotoped
into a unique geodesic loop. Such a geodesic representative can be obtained by
tightening the original loop as to minimize its length; see Figure 4.




    Figure 4. Tightening a loop (left) to its geodesic representative (right).

Remark 2.2. To the concerned reader we point out that, although the closed hy-
perbolic surfaces we draw, e.g., the ones in Figure 4, are certainly not geometrically
accurate, in the sense that they do not look negatively curved everywhere, they will
help us explain some of the concepts that would otherwise be harder to present.
2.4. The geodesic ﬂow. Given a closed hyperbolic surface X, the geodesic ﬂow
                            Φ := {φt : T 1 X → T 1 X}t∈R
on its unit tangent bundle T 1 X is the ﬂow deﬁned by following the geodesic spanned
by a given unit tangent vector for t units of length. The orbits of this ﬂow, or rather
their projections to X, are precisely the geodesics of the surface.
                          CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                                 5


                              3. Exponential mixing
3.1. Random processes. To introduce the notion of chaos we will be interested in,
let us ﬁrst explore an analogous notion in the context of probability theory. Recall
that, given a probability space Ω with a probability measure P, two measurable
events A, B ⊆ Ω are said to be independent if they satisfy
                               P(A ∩ B) = P(A) · P(B).
   Now, in the same context, we could have a random process, i.e., a sequence
of random variables (Yt )t∈R , say, for simplicity, all distributed like Y , and ask
whether the present and future become independent as we let the time grow larger
and larger. More formally this condition can be stated as follows: for every pair of
measurable sets A, B ⊆ R,
                   lim P(Y0 ∈ A, Yt ∈ B) = P(Y ∈ A) · P(Y ∈ B).
                  t→∞

3.2. Mixing. The condition above is the one we want to capture in the setting of
geodesic ﬂows on closed hyperbolic surfaces. Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface
and Φ be the corresponding geodesic ﬂow on its unit tangent bundle T 1 X. To
proceed in analogy with the discussion above, we need a probability measure on
our phase space, i.e., on T 1 X. Although many choices are possible, we will stick
with the most natural one, the Liouville measure, that is, the probability measure
μ corresponding to the area induced by the hyperbolic metric on X and which is
uniform with respect to angle on ﬁbers of T 1 X.
   In this setting we say that the geodesic ﬂow Φ on T 1 X is mixing if for every pair
of measurable sets A, B ⊆ T 1 X,
               lim μ({v ∈ T 1 X | v ∈ A, φt (v) ∈ B)}) = μ(A) · μ(B).
               t→∞
For later reference, let us note that this condition can also be written as
                                                             
      lim       1A (v) 1B (φt (v)) dμ(v) =      1A (v) dμ(v) ·     1B (v) dμ(v).
     t→∞   T 1X                              T 1X                 T 1X
We interpret this condition as chaos because it guarantees that small changes in
the initial condition, i.e., even if we allow it to vary in a tiny positive measure set,
produce wildly diﬀerent outcomes in the long term; indeed, every possible outcome
with the correct proportion given by the underlying Liouville measure.
3.3. Exponential mixing. Now, the asymptotic independence captured by the
notion of mixing could be attained at diﬀerent speeds. This question is a quite
delicate one, and, indeed, it is hard to make sense of it unless one restricts to
suﬃciently regular observables. To this end, we will consider continuously diﬀer-
entiable functions f, g ∈ C 1 (T 1 X) and denote their respective C 1 norms by f C 1
and gC 1 . In this setting we say that the geodesic ﬂow Φ on T 1 X is exponentially
mixing, or chaotic with exponential speed, if there exists constants C > 0 and κ > 0
such that for such every pair f, g ∈ C 1 (T 1 X),
                                                            
                                                               
      f (v) g(φ   (v)) dμ(v)−      f (v) dμ(v)·     g(v) dμ(v)  ≤ Cf C 1 gC 1 e−κt .
 1              t
                                 1                 1
                                                                
  T X                          T X                  T X
  In this setting we have the following result originally due to Moore:
Theorem 3.1 ([Moo87]). The geodesic ﬂow Φ on the unit tangent bundle T 1 X of
any closed hyperbolic surface X is exponentially mixing.
6                           FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


   Moore’s original proof uses the fact that the geodesic ﬂow Φ is the diagonal part
of a larger SL(2, R) action, which provides a rich algebraic structure to study its
properties. We highlight that, although this perspective will be very important for
the discussion in the next section, exponential mixing is a much more prevalent
phenomena, even beyond the homogeneous setting considered here. For instance,
Dolgopyat [Dol98] proved exponential mixing for geodesic ﬂows on closed surfaces
of variable negative curvature.
Remark 3.2. Although we do not elaborate more on it here, we note that exponen-
tial mixing in general is an extremely powerful tool in applications. For instance, it
was used by Kontorovich and Oh [KO11] to solve important sphere packing counting
problems.

                     4. The Laplace–Beltrami operator
4.1. The hyperbolic plane. For reasons that will become clear later, we want to
deﬁne an analogue of the Euclidean Laplacian on H. Recall that the gradient of
a real valued function speciﬁes the direction and rate of maximal increase. Recall
also that the divergence of a vector ﬁeld represents the inﬁnitesimal change in
volume induced by the corresponding ﬂow. The Laplacian of a function is nothing
more than the the divergence of its gradient vector ﬁeld; it is also known as the
Laplace–Beltrami operator.
   Just as this makes sense in Euclidean space, it also makes sense in the hyperbolic
plane; one just needs to be careful to use the corresponding metric and induced
volume form when computing the gradient and divergence. More explicitely, in
the model considered above, the Laplace–Beltrami operator on H is the diﬀerential
operator given by
                                         2          
                                         ∂       ∂2
                               Δ := y 2      +         .
                                         ∂x2    ∂y 2
   Denote by L2 (H) the space of square-integrable functions on the hyperbolic
plane with respect to the corresponding volume form. Then, Δ is an unbounded
self-adjoint operator on L2 (H) whose spectrum is the interval (−∞, −1/4]; the
reader unfamiliar with the notion of spectrum can think of it as a generalization
of eigenvalues to inﬁnite dimensional vector spaces. The number 1/4 will play a
crucial role in the rest of this paper.
Remark 4.1. We refer the reader to [McK70] for a fantastic exposition of these and
more general results on the spectral theory of Laplace–Beltrami operators.
4.2. Closed hyperbolic surfaces. Because the Laplace–Beltrami operator of H
is deﬁned only in terms of its local geometry, it is invariant under its group of
isometries. In particular, one can deﬁne the Laplace–Beltrami operator on the space
L2 (X) of square-integrable functions of an arbitrary closed hyperbolic surface X
via its local identiﬁcations with H. We will also denote this operator by Δ, making
it clear from the context when it corresponds to the operator on L2 (X) rather than
the one on L2 (H).
    The Laplace–Beltrami operator Δ on a closed hyperbolic surface X is thus an
unbounded self-adjoint operator on L2 (X). Furthermore, Δ has compact resolvent
and thus can be diagonalized in the sense that L2 (X) admits a complete orthonor-
mal system of eigenfunctions. More precisely, there exist real numbers and smooth
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                                     7


functions
     0 = λ0 > λ1 ≥ λ2 ≥ · · · with lim λn = −∞,          f0 , f1 , f2 , · · · ∈ C ∞ (X),
                                     n→∞
such that the following conditions hold:
    (1) L2 (X) = span({fn }n∈N ),
    (2) Δfn = λn fn for all n ∈ N.
   The ﬁrst non-zero eigenvalue λ1 < 0 of the Laplace–Beltrami operator Δ on X
will be of particular importance to us. We will denote this eigenvalue by λ1 (X),
making the dependence on X explicit. We will also refer to −λ1 (X) > 0 as the
spectral gap of X.
   At this stage one might ask if there is any relation between the spectrum of the
Laplacian on a closed hyperbolic surface X and the spectrum of the Laplacian on
the hyperbolic plane H. Such connections are not automatic because the square-
integrability condition on the functions considered does not allow one to lift them
from X to H. Still, the well known fact that on any closed hyperbolic surface of
genus g ≥ 2 one can ﬁnd an embedded disk of radius logarithmic in g can be used
to show that:
Theorem 4.2 ([Hub86, Che75]). For every g ≥ 2 there exists (g) < 0 with (g)
0 as g → ∞ such that if X is a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g and λ1 (X) < 0
is the ﬁrst non-zero eigenvalue of its Laplace–Beltrami operator Δ, then
                               λ1 (X) ≥ −1/4 + (g).
Remark 4.3. The interested reader can consult [Bus10] for many other foundational
results on the spectral theory of the Laplace–Beltrami operator on closed hyperbolic
surfaces.
4.3. Speed of mixing. Although Theorem 3.1 guarantees the geodesic ﬂow on the
unit tangent bundle of any closed hyperbolic surface is exponentially mixing, it does
not provide explicit control on the speed of mixing. The following result of Ratner
solves this issue by relating such speed to the spectral gap of the corresponding
Laplace–Beltrami operator:
Theorem 4.4 ([Rat87]). There exists a universal constant C > 0 with the following
property. Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface, λ1 (X) < 0 be the ﬁrst non-zero
eigenvalue of its Laplace Beltrami operator Δ, and
                                   
                          σ := 1 − max{1 + 4λ1 (X), 0}.
Then, for every pair of regular observables f, g ∈ C 1 (T 1 X),
                                                          
                                                             
                                                                        −σt
 1 f (v)g(φt (v))dμ(v) − 1 f (v)dμ(v) · 1 g(v)dμ(v) ≤ Cf C 1 gC 1 te .
  T X                        T X               T X
   Ratner actually proves a more general result about the decay of matrix co-
eﬃcients of irreducible SL(2, R) representations in terms of the spectrum of the
corresponding Casimir operator. Recall that, as highlighted by Moore’s work, the
geodesic ﬂow Φ of a closed hyperbolic surface is the diagonal part of a larger SL(2, R)
action. Theorem 4.4 above can be recovered from Ratner’s more general result once
one remembers the well known fact that the spectrum of the Casimir operator on
L2 (T 1 X) and the Laplace–Beltrami operator on L2 (X) coincide when restricted
to the interval (−1/4, 0); beyond this range the spectral data cannot be directly
related because of the existence of discrete series.
8                           FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


                        5. The Selberg Trace Formula
5.1. Motivation. As we saw in Theorem 4.4, the speed of chaos of the geodesic
ﬂow of a closed hyperbolic surface is controlled by the spectral gap of its Laplace–
Beltrami operator. But how to compute, or at least estimate, this spectral gap?
This question is a rather complicated one, to the point that, even in some of the
simplest cases, we do not have a complete answer; see for instance Selberg’s famous
1/4 conjecture [Sel65].

5.2. The trace formula. The moral of the story is that accessing the spectral
data of the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a closed hyperbolic surface X is quite a
formidable task. Perhaps there is hope if one could relate such data to information
about the geometry of the surface, which should, at least in spirit, be more accessible
to a direct analysis.
   Here is where Selberg’s trace formula enters the picture. Roughly speaking, one
could deﬁne a natural operator on L2 (X), for instance, using the structure of X
as a homogeneous space, and compute its trace in two ways: on one hand, using
the geometry of the surface, more precisely, the fact that its closed geodesics are in
one-to-one correspondence with conjugacy classes of its fundamental group, and, on
the other hand, using the fact that eigenfunctions of the Laplace–Beltrami operator
Δ provide a complete orthonormal system of L2 (X). To give a precise statement
of this formula we ﬁrst set up some notation.
   Recall that, given a smooth, compactly supported function H : R → R, its
Fourier transform is the function H : C → C deﬁned as
                                       
                              H(r) :=     H( ) e−ir d .
                                        R
   Given a hyperbolic surface X, we will denote by G(X) the set of primitive ori-
ented closed geodesics on X; by primitive here we mean closed geodesics that cannot
be obtained by concatenating multiple copies of a shorter closed geodesic. Given
γ ∈ G(X), we will denote its hyperbolic length by (γ) > 0.
   We are now ready to state Selberg’s trace formula. Although this formula holds
in much more generality, we restrict ourselves to the case of closed hyperbolic
surfaces.
Theorem 5.1 ([Sel56]). Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g ≥ 2 whose
Laplace–Beltrami operator Δ on L2 (X) has eigenvalues
           0 = λ0 (X) > λ1 (X) ≥ λ2 (X) ≥ · · · with lim λn (X) = −∞.
                                                       n→∞

For every j ∈ N ∪ {0} denote

          rj (X) :=    −λj (X) − 1/4    with − π/2 < arg(rj (X)) ≤ π/2.
Then, for every smooth, compactly supported function H : R → R,
   +∞                                                   +∞
                                                              (γ)H(k (γ))
       H(rj (X)) = (g − 1) H(r) tanh(πr)r dr +                              .
   j=0                     R                                2 sinh(k (γ)/2)
                                                      γ∈G(X) k=1

   For obvious reasons, the left hand side of Selberg’s trace formula is usually known
as the spectral side, while the right hand side is commonly known as the geometric
side.
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                               9


Remark 5.2. The reader interested in an extended discussion on Selberg’s trace
formula, its derivation, and its consequences, is encouraged to consult [Mar12].
5.3. Weyl’s law. Let us take a small detour to illustrate the kind of spectral
information one can extract using Selberg’s trace formula. Applying a suitable
generalization of Theorem 5.1 to H(r) = e−βr with β → 0, one can deduce the
                                                2


following Weyl law for the eigenvalues of the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a closed
hyperbolic surface:
Corollary 5.3. Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g ≥ 2 whose Laplace–
Beltrami operator Δ on L2 (X) has eigenvalues
           0 = λ0 (X) > λ1 (X) ≥ λ2 (X) ≥ · · · with lim λn (X) = −∞.
                                                      n→∞
Then,
                   #{j ∈ N ∪ {0} : − λj (X) ≤ λ}   Area(X)
             lim                                 =         = g − 1.
            λ→+∞                λ                    4π
                       6. Random hyperbolic surfaces
6.1. Motivation. All closed hyperbolic surfaces of a given genus ﬁt together nicely
into a moduli space. A model of random closed hyperbolic surfaces of a given genus
is nothing more than a probability measure in the corresponding moduli space.
There are certainly many interesting models one can consider, but for the purposes
of this discussion we will restrict ourselves to the Weil–Petersson model. Although
we will not emphasize it here, this is the natural model to consider from the point
of view of hyperbolic geometry.
Remark 6.1. In parallel to the story we describe in this paper, an equally beau-
tiful study of the spectral properties of random covers of non-compact ﬁnite area
hyperbolic surfaces was carried out by Hide and Magee [HM23].
6.2. The Weil–Petersson model. To describe the Weil–Petersson model for ran-
dom closed hyperbolic surfaces of a given genus, we ﬁrst introduce a local system
of coordinates for the corresponding moduli space.
   Notice that, from the point of view of topology, any closed surface of genus
g ≥ 2 can be constructed by glueing 2g − 2 pairs of pants, that is, spheres with
three boundary components, along their boundaries; see Figure 5 for an example
of such a decomposition. A similar construction can also be considered for closed
hyperbolic surfaces. Indeed, cutting a closed hyperbolic surface of genus g ≥ 2 along
any collection of 3g −3 disjoint simple closed geodesics yields 2g −2 hyperbolic pairs
of pants with geodesic boundary components. This class of pairs of pants is very
rigid, in the sense that their geometry is completely determined by the lengths of
their boundary components.




         Figure 5. A pair of pants decomposition of a genus 2 surface.

   Glueing back these pairs of pants following the same original pattern allows us to
recover the closed hyperbolic surface we started with. But one needs to be careful
10                         FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


at this point, as there are several ways in which one can glue back these pants along
their cuﬀs. Indeed, for each geodesic one cut the original surface along, there is a
full circle worth of diﬀerent twist with which one can glue back the adjacent pairs
of pants; see Figure 6.




        Figure 6. Twisting a hyperbolic surface along a closed geodesic.

   In this way we can provide a local coordinate system near any surface X in the
moduli space Mg of closed hyperbolic surfaces of genus g ≥ 2. Indeed, given any
geodesic pair of pants decomposition of X, a local coordinate system is obtained by
keeping track of the lengths and the twists, measured in units of hyperbolic length,
along the geodesics in the given pair of pants decomposition. These coordinate
systems are commonly known as Fenchel–Nielsen coordinates. We can now deﬁne
the desired model of random closed hyperbolic surfaces by appealing to a result of
Wolpert:
Theorem 6.2 ([Wol83]). For any g ≥ 2 there exists a unique ﬁnite measure μWP    g
on the moduli space Mg , called the Weil–Petersson measure, that is locally equal to
the Lebesgue measure on any set of Fenchel–Nielsen coordinates.
   The Weil–Petersson model of random closed hyperbolic surfaces of genus g ≥
2 is obtained by normalizing the Weil–Petersson measure μWP  g   on Mg to get a
probability measure PWP
                     g . We will denote integrals with respect to this probability
measure by EWPg . It will also be useful to record the total mass of μg
                                                                       WP
                                                                           as the
number Vg > 0.
Remark 6.3. The reader interested in the Weil–Petersson geometry of moduli spaces
of hyperbolic surfaces and some of its applications is invited to consult [Wol13].
6.3. Mirzakhani’s integration formulas. Now notice that if we cut a closed
hyperbolic surface along a simple closed geodesic we obtain a compact hyperbolic
surface with geodesic boundary, potentially disconnected, but certainly of lower
complexity. Furthermore, the Weil–Petersson measures on the corresponding mod-
uli spaces behave nicely under this operation because they are explicitely described
in terms of length and twist parameters. Using this simple yet powerful idea, Mirza-
khani was able to prove remarkable formulas for computing integrals with respect
to Weil–Petersson measures.
   Before stating a particular instance of these formulas, let us ﬁrst introduce some
notation. Given a closed hyperbolic surface X, denote by Gs (X) ⊆ G(X) the set of
all oriented simple closed geodesics on X. Given a measurable function F : R → R
with compact support, consider the sum
                             Fs (X) :=              F ( (γ)).
                                         γ∈Gs (X)

  The following is just one of the many variants of Mirzakhani’s integration for-
mulas:
                        CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                             11


Theorem 6.4 ([Mir08]). For every g ≥ 2 there exists an explicit polynomial func-
tion Vgs : R → R of degree 6g − 7, called a volume polynomial, with the following
property. Let F : R → R be a measurable function with compact support. Then,
                                          +∞
                                       1
                     EWP
                       g  (F s (X)) =          F ( )Vgs ( ) d .
                                      Vg 0
Remark 6.5. Although we will not elaborate further here, it is a crucial part of
Mirzakhani’s work that the functions Vgs ( ) can be computed recursively by induc-
tion on the integer g.

   Notice how fascinating Theorem 6.4 is: We have a very complicated moduli space
of closed hyperbolic surfaces, yet, somehow, we are able to compute integrals on
this space via integration with respect to an explicit polynomial density on R!
   To illustrate how explicit the description of the volume polynomials Vgs ( ) in
Theorem 6.4 can be, we present the following estimate of Mirzakhani and Petri:

Theorem 6.6 ([MP19]). There exists c > 0 such that uniformly for all g ≥ 2 and
all > 0,
                                                     
                Vgs ( )  4     2             (1 + )c e
                        = sinh        +O                  .
                  Vg               2             g
6.4. Mirzkhani’s counting formulas. Although we will not explore these ideas
any further, we would like to at least mention in passing what is perhaps one of the
most famous applications of Mirzakhani’s integration formulas, that is, her counting
formulas for simple closed geodesics on closed hyperbolic surfaces:

Theorem 6.7 ([Mir08]). For every closed hyperbolic surface X of genus g ≥ 2
there exists a positive constant B(X) > 0 such that
                         #{γ ∈ Gs (X) : (γ) ≤ L}
                      lim                        = B(X).
                     L→∞          L6g−6
Remark 6.8. The reader interested in exploring more about the history of counting
results in the direction of Theorem 6.7 is invited to consult [AH25].


                            7. Optimal spectral gap
7.1. Main result. We are now ready to state a precise version of the following re-
sult highlighted in §1: Random large genus closed hyperbolic surfaces have optimal
spectral gap. Notice that, by Theorem 4.2, one cannot hope for spectral gaps of
large genus closed hyperbolic surfaces to be greater than 1/4. In this context, the
main result of Anantharaman and Monk we wish to discuss is the following:

Theorem 7.1 ([AM23, AM24b, AM25]). For every  > 0,
                                            
                                        1
                     lim PWP
                               −λ1 (X) ≤ −  = 0.
                    g→∞ g               4
Remark 7.2. An analogous result for random regular graphs of a ﬁxed valency with
many vertices was conjectured ﬁrst by Alon [Alo86] and later proved by Friedman
[Fri08]. Theorem 7.1 and parts of its proof are directly inspired by this result.
12                            FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


7.2. Towards optimality. Let us describe a basic strategy one can try to follow
to prove Theorem 7.1 using the tools introduced in previous sections.
   Our starting point will be Selberg’s trace formula; see Theorem 5.1 for a precise
statement. For the moment, ﬁx an arbitrary closed hyperbolic surface X of genus
g; later this surface will be chosen at random. Consider a test function H : R → R
that is smooth, non-negative, even, and with support equal to [−1, 1]; see Figure
7. Furthermore, assume its Fourier transform H : C → C is real valued and non-
negative on R ∪ i[−1/2, 1/2]. For large values of L ≥ 1 we will apply the trace
formula using the test functions
                   HL ( ) := H( /L)    and   HL (r) = LH(rL).
Notice that HL is supported on [−L, L], so the geometric side of Selberg’s trace
formula will only involved closed geodesics γ ∈ G(X) with (γ) ≤ L.




                         Figure 7. The test function H.

   The ﬁrst key observation is that eigenvalues λj > −1/4 of the Laplace–Beltrami
operator Δ on L2 (X) corresponding to purely imaginary values rj ∈ i[−1/2, 1/2] \
{0} in Theorem 5.1. In particular, because H is non-negative, the corresponding
terms on the spectral side of Selberg’s trace formula can be bounded roughly as
                          1                     1        
             H(rj ) = 2L     H ( ) e|rj | d ≥      H( ) d · e|rj |L/2 .
                          0                     1/2

In other words, because H has support equal to [−1, 1], small eigenvalues of the
Laplace–Beltrami operator Δ on L2 (X), whose existence we are trying to rule out,
correspond to exponential growth on the spectral side of Selberg’s trace formula.
Thus, at least intuitively, we should aim to show that the geometric side of the
trace formula grows subexponentially.
   Denote r1 by r1 (X), making the dependence on X explicit. Being a bit more
precise with the bounds above, one can show that, for every α > 0 and every  > 0,
there exists a constant Cα, > 0 such that for every closed hyperbolic surface X,
                          1
             −λ1 (X) ≤      − α2 −  ⇒ HL (r1 (X)) ≥ Cα, e(α+ )L .
                          4
In particular, for every g ≥ 2,
                                                                     
                           1
       PgWP
               −λ1 (X) ≤ − α −  ≤ PWP
                                2
                                       g   H L (r 1 (X)) ≥ C α, e(α+ )L
                                                                          .
                           4
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                             13


The role of α here is to represent diﬀerent degrees of precision one can aim for when
proving Theorem 7.1; the goal is to prove the desired statement for arbitrarily small
α.
   As is usual in probability theory, and recalling the non-negativity assumption on
H, one can use Markov’s inequality to bound
                                                                      
                                                EWP g    HL (r1 (X))
             PWP
               g     HL (r1 (X)) ≥ Cα, e(α+ )L ≤                         .
                                                        Cα, e(α+ )L
This reduces the proof of Theorem 7.1 to showing that, for some appropriate choice
of L = L(g), later to be chosen so that L(g) → +∞ as g → ∞,
                                                    
                               EWP
                                 g   HL(g) (r1 (X))
                           lim                         = 0.
                          g→∞       Cα, e(α+ )L
   To derive these asymptotics on the expected value we integrate the trace formula.
But notice ﬁrst that on both sides of this formula there are terms that do not depend
on the underlying closed hyperbolic surface. On the spectral side, this corresponds
to the eigenvalue λ0 = 0, or, equivalently, to r0 = i/2. Indeed, we have
                                            +∞
(7.1)             HL (r0 ) = HL (i/2) = 2       HL ( ) cosh( /2) d .
                                          0

On the geometric side, the constant term corresponds to the one outside the sum
over all closed geodesics. Recall that tanh(x) ≤ 1 for all x ∈ R, and that, because
H has compact support, H decays faster than any polynomial. Thus, we can bound
                                             
                                              
                  (g − 1) H(r) tanh(πr)r dr  ≤ gr H(r)L1 (R) .
                                              
                           R

   Another important preliminary observation to make is that the terms coming
from non-primitive closed geodesics, i.e., from k ≥ 2 in Theorem 5.1, are of lower
order. Although we will not go into details here, an appropriate estimate can be
obtained by using the fact that the sinh(k (γ)/2) factor in the denominator of the
sum of the geometric side of the trace formula grows exponentially with k, and
so the corresponding contributions will be much smaller for k ≥ 2 than for k = 1.
More precisely, one can show there exists a constant C  > 0 such that for any g ≥ 2,
                     ⎛                            ⎞
                             +∞
                     ⎝             (γ)H(k    (γ)) ⎠ ≤ C  H∞ L2 g.
                EWP
                 g
                                 2 sinh(k (γ)/2)
                       γ∈G(X) k=2

   The contribution of simple closed geodesics will also play an important role in
our discussion. Using Mirzakhani’s integration formulas, i.e., Theorem 6.4, and the
estimates on volume polynomials in Theorem 6.6, one can show that, uniformly for
all g ≥ 2,
       ⎛                       ⎞
                                     +∞                                       
   WP ⎝           (γ)H(  (γ))  ⎠                                        Lc eL/2
 Eg                              =2       HL ( ) cosh( /2) d + O 1 +              .
                2 sinh( (γ)/2)        0                                     g
        γ∈Gs (X)

Notice how the leading term in this estimate, which contributes to the geometric
side of the trace formula, exactly matches the spectral side computation in (7.1).
14                          FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


   From this discussion it follows that, after integrating Selberg’s trace formula over
moduli space, one can deduce that, uniformly on g ≥ 2,
                                                     ⎛                               ⎞
                                   c L/2
                                            
                                   L  e             ⎝                  (γ)H(  (γ))  ⎠.
EWP     L(g) (r1 (X)) ≤ O L g +
                               2
 g    H                                       +EWPg
                                       g                              2 sinh( (γ)/2)
                                                      γ∈G(X) \Gs (X)

It turns out that, through very sophisticated geometric arguments, one can show
that, for every  > 0, there exists C  > 0 such that, uniformly on g ≥ 2,
                     ⎛                               ⎞
                     ⎝                   (γ)H( (γ)) ⎠          e(1+ )L/2
(7.2)          EWP
                 g                                      ≤ C            .
                                      2 sinh( (γ)/2)               g
                      γ∈G(X) \Gs (X)

In particular, if we take α = 1/4 and L(g) = 4 log g, we conclude
                                                     
                                EWP
                                 g   HL(g) (r 1 (X))
                            lim                         = 0.
                           g→∞      Cα, e(α+ )
   This is precisely the approach considered independently by Wu and Xue [WX22]
and Lipnowski and Wright [LW24] in their proofs of the weaker version of Theorem
7.1 with a spectral gap of 3/16. Let us highlight that their arguments to prove
(7.2) are quite diﬀerent.

7.3. Optimality. All that work and we are still far oﬀ from the desired spectral
gap of 1/4. What needs to be improved to reach that threshold? On one hand,
we cannot expect a bound as in (7.2) to be suﬃcient: we should aim for better
estimates as we did for simple closed geodesics. Furthermore, even the estimates in
Theorem 6.6 for simple closed geodesics are not enough for our purposes: we need
more precise expansions in inverse powers of g.

7.3.1. Alternative trace scheme. Before we proceed any further, let us introduce
an alternative application of Selberg’s trace formula that will be more suitable for
our purposes. The main aim is to kill the contributions coming from the trivial
eigenvalue λ0 = 0, i.e., r0 = i/2. To do so we consider the diﬀerential operator
                                      1     d2
                                    D := − 2
                                      4 d
and for some arbitrary m ≥ 1 we replace the test functions above by
                                                      m
                                               1
                D HL ( ) and D HL (r) =
                  m               m               +r 2
                                                          HL (r).
                                                4
   Notice that, although the Fourier transform of the test functions considered still
retains the desired non-negativity properties, the test function itself now changes
signs; see Figure 8. This will introduce signiﬁcant diﬃculties that will need to be
dealt with later.
   Another important point to make is that, in killing the contributions of the trivial
eigenvalue, we produced test functions for which eigenvalues near zero do not longer
give rise to uniform exponential growth. Nevertheless, as we already established a
uniform spectral gap for random large genus hyperbolic surfaces, this issue can be
easily bypassed; in fact, it is enough to quote Mirzakhani’s softer original proof of
uniform spectral gap [Mir13].
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                             15




                        Figure 8. The test function DH.


7.3.2. General integration formulas. Back to the ﬁrst of our main concerns: How do
we even integrate functions of non-simple closed geodesics if Mirzakhani’s inductive
approach only seems to work for simple ones? Let us introduce the ﬁrst main insight
of Anantharaman and Monk, local topological types. Roughly speaking, the local
topological type of a closed geodesic on a closed hyperbolic surface is the isotopy
class of the subsurface obtained by thickening the geodesic to a tubular neighbor-
hood together with the information of how the geodesic ﬁlls such subsurface; see
Figure 9. The most basic local topological type are simple closed geodesics: they all
thicken to an annulus. Notice that we can make sense of a given local topological
type on any surface of suﬃciently large genus.




            Figure 9. The local topological type of a closed geodesic.


   Given a closed hyperbolic surface X and a local topological type of closed
geodesics T , denote by GT (X) ⊆ G(X) the set of all oriented closed geodesics
on X of topological type T . Just as for simple closed geodesics, given a measurable
function F : R → R with compact support, consider the sum

                            FT (X) :=              F ( (γ)).
                                        γ∈GT (X)

   Although general closed geodesics might not be simple, and thus, a priori, not
amenable with inductive procedures, the surfaces obtained via thickening allow one
to prove the following result in the spirit of Mirzakhani’s integration formulas:

Theorem 7.3 ([AM23]). Let T be a local topological type of closed geodesics. Then,
for every g ≥ 2 there exists a function VgT : R → R, called a volume function, with
the following property. Let F : R → R be a measurable function with compact
support. Then,
                                           +∞
                                        1
                      Eg (FT (X)) =
                       WP
                                                F ( )VgT ( ) d .
                                       Vg 0
16                         FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


  Notice that, in contrast with Theorem 6.4, the volume function VgT ( ) in Theo-
rem 7.3 need not be a polynomial. Nevertheless, through sophisticated geometric
methods, one can still control its behavior in a very precise way, as we now discuss.

7.3.3. Friedman-Ramanujan functions. We would like to have an estimate as in
Theorem 6.6 for volume functions VgT ( ) of general local topological types T . Fur-
thermore, we would like an even more precise expansion in inverse powers of g.
Such an expansion was proven to exist in the work of Anantharaman and Monk:
Theorem 7.4 ([AM23]). Let T be a local topological type of closed geodesics cor-
responding to a ﬁlled surface S of Euler characteristic χ(S) ≤ 0. Then, the vol-
ume function VgT ( ) admits an asymptotic expansion in inverse powers of g in the
following sense: There exists a unique family of continuous functions (fkT : R →
R)k≥−χ(S) such that for any integer K ≥ 0, any large enough g ≥ 2, and any
η > 0,
                               K                      (1+η) 
                   VgT ( )          fkT ( )           e
                           =            k
                                            + OK,S,η            .
                     Vg               g                g K+1
                                k=−χ(S)

   This expansion would not be of much use without a good understanding of
the structure of the functions fkT ( ). Inspired by Friedman’s proof of Alon’s con-
jecture [Fri08], Anantharam and Monk introduced a class of so-called Friedman–
Ramanujan functions:
Deﬁnition 7.5. A continuous function r : R → C is said to be of class Rw if there
exist constants c1 , c2 > 0 such that for all n ≥ 1,
                             n
                                |r(s)| ds ≤ c1 (n + 1)c2 en/2 .
                            0

A continuous function f : R → C is said to be a Friedman–Ramanujan function if
there exists a polynomial function p : R → C and a function r : R → C of class Rw
such that
                       f ( ) = p( )e + r( ), for all ≥ 0.
   Roughly speaking, Friedman–Ramanujan functions produce extra cancellations
when integrated against the sinh( /2) denominator in Selberg’s trace formula when
using the alternative scheme proposed above. Such cancellations arise via inte-
gration by parts once one notices that, for any such function, if the leading term
corresponds to a polynomial of degree strictly less than m, then the product of such
leading term with e−/2 belongs to the kernel of the diﬀerential operator Dm .
   Perhaps the most important and technical step in the proof of Anantharam
and Monk of Theorem 7.1 is verifying that the functions fkT ( ) in the expansions
provided by Theorem 7.4 are Friedmann–Ramanujan functions:
Theorem 7.6 ([AM23]). Let T be a local topological type of closed geodesics cor-
responding to a ﬁlled surface S of Euler characteristic χ(S) ≤ 0. Deﬁne s := 1
if T corresponds to simple closed geodesics and s := 0 otherwise. Then, for any
k ≥ −χ(S), the function
                                ∈ R → s fkT ( ) ∈ R,
with fkT ( ) as in Theorem 7.4, is a Friedman–Ramanujan function.
                         CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                               17


Remark 7.7. A more precise version of Theorem 7.6 is needed and proved in the
work of Anantharaman and Monk. With the aim of simplifying the exposition here,
we have opted to restrict our attention to the weaker version above.

   But how to show that a function is Friedmann–Ramanujan? It turns out that
this class of functions can be characterized as the solution set of a simple integro-
diﬀerential equation. Using this characterization, one can show stability of this class
under certain convolution operations with respect to a class of suﬃciently regular
kernels. This class of kernels contains variants of hyperbolic trigonometric functions
that naturally show up when computing lengths of closed geodesics on compact
hyperbolic surfaces. The proof of Anantharaman and Monk involves constructing
variants of Fenchel–Nielsen coordinates of compact hyperbolic surfaces for which
the lengths of ﬁlling closed geodesics can be represented as convolutions with respect
to the right class of kernels.

7.3.4. Tangles. We seem to be on the right track, but there is a glaring issue we have
not yet addressed. Suppose that we proceed with our alternative trace scheme, and,
inspired by the suboptimal gap bound above, we consider L(g) := A log g for some
large but ﬁxed constant A > 0. One can show that, at this scale, when analizing the
geometric side of Selberg’s trace formula, it is enough to consider closed geodesics
ﬁlling subsurfaces of Euler characteristic at least −(2A + 1). Nevertheless, even
with this bound on the Euler characteristic of the ﬁlled subsurface, there could still
be inﬁnitely many local topological types to consider, all contributing error terms
that will not be summable in the end.
   What leads to the proliferation of too many local topological types? This phe-
nomena is explained by Anantharaman and Monk via the notion of tangles; see
Figure 10. According to this picture, a closed geodesic can wind around a surface
in tight loops in such a way that it gives rise to a geodesic pair of pants with
short boundary components. More generally, a tangle is an extremely short closed
geodesic, a geodesic pair of pants with short boundary components, or a geodesic
once-holed tori with short boundary.




        Figure 10. A tightly looping geodesic (red) and its tangle (blue).


   Denote by TFg ⊆ Mg the set of tangle-free closed hyperbolic surfaces of genus
g ≥ 2. Technically speaking, a proper deﬁnition of tangle-free surfaces should
involve parameters that control the shortness of the geodesics in the bad conﬁgu-
rations speciﬁed above; we will not aim for such level of precision in our discussion.
From work of Mirzakhani, Monk, and Thomas, one can deduce that random large
genus closed hyperbolic surfaces are tangle-free in the following sense:
18                         FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


Theorem 7.8 ([Mir13, MT22]). The following limit holds with an explicit conver-
gence rate,
                           lim PWP
                                g   (TFg ) = 1.
                               g→∞

   Furthermore, as one would hope from our previous discussion, the proliferation
of local topological types in tangle-free surfaces can be controlled:
Theorem 7.9 ([AM24a]). Fix a large constant A > 0 and g ≥ 2. Then, the
number of local topological types that can be represented as a ﬁlling closed geodesic
γ of length (γ) ≤ A log g on a tangle-free compact hyperbolic surface of Euler
characteristic at least −(2A + 1) is bounded uniformly by a polynomial in log g.
7.3.5. Moebius inversion. Everything seems to be in place for the proof of Theorem
7.1 to go through. But in handling the proliferation of too many local topologi-
cal types we have introduced a new issue: the indicator function 1TFg cannot be
integrated a la Mirzakhani. Notice also that we cannot just use the crude bound
1TFg ≤ 1 because the test function considered in the alternative trace scheme
changes signs.
   Do not despair though, as a well known trick also featured in the work of Fried-
man on random graphs can be used to address this issue. The idea is to perform
inclusion-exclusion to rewrite the indicator function 1TFg as an alternating sum of
geometric counting functions. In general, if N is a random variable counting the
number of a appearances of a geometric pattern, in our case N will count tangles,
then one can rewrite
                                            +∞
                                                (−1)j
(7.3)                       1{N =0} = 1 −             Nj ,
                                            j=1
                                                  j!
where, for every j ∈ N, the random variable Nj corresponds to the number of
ordered families of j geometric patterns that are being counted by N . Notice these
random variables are counting functions, and so one hopes to be able to integrate
them as above.
   Nevertheless, tangles are relatively complicated geometric patterns, in the sense
that the variables Nj do not have a clear geometric interpretation. Hence, one
cannot expect to apply a formula as clean as (7.3) directly in our setting. Nev-
ertheless, Anantharam and Monk are able to prove a similar, albeit less explicit,
Moebius inversion formula that can be integrated in the sense of Mirzakhani. This
formula is quite involved and describing it explicitly would escape the scope of our
discussion; see [AM24a] for a precise statement.
7.3.6. Finishing the proof. All the ingredients are now in place to ﬁnish the proof
of Theorem 7.1. After discarding surfaces with tangles using the Moebius inversion
formula, the polynomially many relevant terms on the geometric side of Selberg’s
trace formula can be integrated to obtain cancelations with summable errors. More
precisely, given an arbitrary integer K ≥ 0, one considers the scale L(g) := 2(K +
2) log g and ﬁxes an integer m depending on the degrees of the polynomials in the
leading terms of the Friedman–Ramanujan functions that show up in the expansion
of order K provided by Theorem 7.4. This way one concludes that for α := 1/2(K +
2) and every  > 0,
                                                      
                                             1
                       lim P WP
                                  −λ1 (X) ≤ − α −  = 0.
                                                   2
                      g→∞ g                  4
                           CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                                    19


7.4. Conclusion. In closing, we would like to invite the reader to look back at
the main problem at hand, its history, and its implications. We are interested in
estimating the spectral gap of the Laplace–Beltrami operator of a typical closed
hyperbolic surface of large genus, with the hope of showing that it is arbitrarily
close to the optimal bound of 1/4. This is relevant because, among many other
things, such spectral gap controls the speed of chaos of the corresponding geodesic
ﬂow.
   But experience shows that spectral data is very hard to access, even in explicit
examples. Regardless, we can keep our hopes high and try to inspire ourselves on
Selberg’s success story. This leads us to use his trace formula to relate spectral
data to geometric data that should, at least a priori, be more easily accessible. As
we only care about typical closed hyperbolic surfaces, using any type of Markov
inequality we can reduce our problem to estimating the integral of the trace formula
over the corresponding moduli space.
   Now, although originally introduced to address a completely diﬀerent set of
problems, we can use Mirzakhani’s integration formulas to compute the integral
of the geometric side of the trace formula. But only when the closed geodesics
involved are simple, or so one would expect at ﬁrst glance. Not too bad, as this
lead to a spectral gap of 3/16.
   Enter now the revolution of Anantharaman and Monk, who teach us that, al-
though explicit formulas à la Mirzakhani are not attainable for moduli space inte-
grals involving non-simple closed geodesics, it is still possible to compute estimates
in a precise way via the notion of Friedmann–Ramanujan functions. Furthermore
the cancellations obtained via this approach lead to summable error terms as long
as one discards closed hyperbolic surfaces with tangles. Although not possible in
the most naive way, such surfaces can be discarded via a sophisticated Moebius
inversion formula. All of this can be carried out with such precision as to obtain
the desired optimal spectral gap of 1/4.
   Before going to bed tonight, just contemplate for a moment the beauty of all of
these ideas from seemingly unrelated sources, geometry, analysis, and probability,
coming together to provide a complete and clean answer to such an ellusive and
diﬃcult problem. And do not forget to reﬂect on the creativity and technical
prowess that was needed by Anantharaman and Monk to see this tour de force
proof to the end!


                                       References
[AH25]  Francisco Arana-Herrera, Counting problems from the viewpoint of ergodic theory: from
        primitive integer points to simple closed curves, Ergodic Theory Dynam. Systems 45
        (2025), no. 5, 1281–1328, DOI 10.1017/etds.2024.76. MR4887198
[Alo86] N. Alon, Eigenvalues and expanders, Combinatorica 6 (1986), no. 2, 83–96, DOI
        10.1007/BF02579166. Theory of computing (Singer Island, Fla., 1984). MR875835
[AM23] Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk, Friedman-ramanujan functions in random
        hyperbolic geometry and application to spectral gaps, E-prints, arXiv:2304.02678, 2023.
[AM24a] Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk, A moebius inversion formula to discard tangled
        hyperbolic surfaces, E-prints, arXiv:2401.01601, 2024.
[AM24b] Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk, Spectral gap of random hyperbolic surfaces,
        E-prints, arXiv:2403.12576, 2024.
[AM25] Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk, Friedman-ramanujan functions in random
        hyperbolic geometry and application to spectral gaps II, E-prints, arXiv:2502.12268,
        2025.
20                              FRANCISCO ARANA–HERRERA


[Bus10] Peter Buser, Geometry and spectra of compact Riemann surfaces, Modern Birkhäuser
        Classics, Birkhäuser Boston, Ltd., Boston, MA, 2010. Reprint of the 1992 edition, DOI
        10.1007/978-0-8176-4992-0. MR2742784
[Che75] Shiu Yuen Cheng, Eigenvalue comparison theorems and its geometric applications,
        Math. Z. 143 (1975), no. 3, 289–297, DOI 10.1007/BF01214381. MR378001
[Dol98] Dmitry Dolgopyat, On decay of correlations in Anosov ﬂows, Ann. of Math. (2) 147
        (1998), no. 2, 357–390, DOI 10.2307/121012. MR1626749
[Fri08] Joel Friedman, A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture and related problems,
        Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 195 (2008), no. 910, viii+100, DOI 10.1090/memo/0910.
        MR2437174
[HM23] Will Hide and Michael Magee, Near optimal spectral gaps for hyperbolic surfaces, Ann.
        of Math. (2) 198 (2023), no. 2, 791–824, DOI 10.4007/annals.2023.198.2.6. MR4635304
[Hub86] Heinz Huber, Untere Schranken für den ersten Eigenwert des Laplace-Operators auf
        kompakten Riemannschen Flächen (German), Comment. Math. Helv. 61 (1986), no. 1,
        46–59, DOI 10.1007/BF02621901. MR847519
[KO11] Alex Kontorovich and Hee Oh, Apollonian circle packings and closed horospheres on hy-
        perbolic 3-manifolds, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 24 (2011), no. 3, 603–648, DOI 10.1090/S0894-
        0347-2011-00691-7. With an appendix by Oh and Nimish Shah. MR2784325
[KS12] Lipika Kabiraj and Raman Sujith, Intermittency and route to chaos in thermoacoustic
        oscillations doctor of philosophy department of aerospace engineering thesis certiﬁcate,
        Ph.D. thesis, 01 2012.
[LW24] Michael Lipnowski and Alex Wright, Towards optimal spectral gaps in large genus, Ann.
        Probab. 52 (2024), no. 2, 545–575, DOI 10.1214/23-aop1657. MR4718401
[Mar12] Jens Marklof, Selberg’s trace formula: an introduction, Hyperbolic geometry and appli-
        cations in quantum chaos and cosmology, London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser., vol. 397,
        Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2012, pp. 83–119. MR2885182
[McK70] H. P. McKean, An upper bound to the spectrum of Δ on a manifold of negative curvature,
        J. Diﬀerential Geometry 4 (1970), 359–366. MR266100
[Mir08] Maryam Mirzakhani, Growth of the number of simple closed geodesics on hyperbolic
        surfaces, Ann. of Math. (2) 168 (2008), no. 1, 97–125, DOI 10.4007/annals.2008.168.97.
        MR2415399
[Mir13] Maryam Mirzakhani, Growth of Weil-Petersson volumes and random hyperbolic surfaces
        of large genus, J. Diﬀerential Geom. 94 (2013), no. 2, 267–300. MR3080483
[Moo87] Calvin C. Moore, Exponential decay of correlation coeﬃcients for geodesic ﬂows, Group
        representations, ergodic theory, operator algebras, and mathematical physics (Berkeley,
        Calif., 1984), Math. Sci. Res. Inst. Publ., vol. 6, Springer, New York, 1987, pp. 163–181,
        DOI 10.1007/978-1-4612-4722-7 6. MR880376
[MP19] Maryam Mirzakhani and Bram Petri, Lengths of closed geodesics on random surfaces of
        large genus, Comment. Math. Helv. 94 (2019), no. 4, 869–889, DOI 10.4171/cmh/477.
        MR4046008
[MT22] Laura Monk and Joe Thomas, The tangle-free hypothesis on random hyperbolic sur-
        faces, Int. Math. Res. Not. IMRN 22 (2022), 18154–18185, DOI 10.1093/imrn/rnab160.
        MR4514465
[Rat87] Marina Ratner, The rate of mixing for geodesic and horocycle ﬂows, Ergodic Theory
        Dynam. Systems 7 (1987), no. 2, 267–288, DOI 10.1017/S0143385700004004. MR896798
[Sel56] A. Selberg, Harmonic analysis and discontinuous groups in weakly symmetric Riemann-
        ian spaces with applications to Dirichlet series, J. Indian Math. Soc. (N.S.) 20 (1956),
        47–87. MR88511
[Sel65] Atle Selberg, On the estimation of Fourier coeﬃcients of modular forms, Proc. Sympos.
        Pure Math., Vol. VIII, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1965, pp. 1–15. MR182610
[Wol83] Scott Wolpert, On the symplectic geometry of deformations of a hyperbolic surface,
        Ann. of Math. (2) 117 (1983), no. 2, 207–234, DOI 10.2307/2007075. MR690844
[Wol13] Scott A. Wolpert, Mirzakhani’s volume recursion and approach for the Witten-
        Kontsevich theorem on moduli tautological intersection numbers, Moduli spaces of Rie-
        mann surfaces, IAS/Park City Math. Ser., vol. 20, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
        2013, pp. 221–266, DOI 10.1090/pcms/020/08. MR3114687
                          CHAOS IN LARGE GENUS SURFACES                                21


[WX22] Yunhui Wu and Yuhao Xue, Random hyperbolic surfaces of large genus have ﬁrst
                                3
       eigenvalues greater than 16 − , Geom. Funct. Anal. 32 (2022), no. 2, 340–410, DOI
       10.1007/s00039-022-00595-7. MR4408435

  Department of Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005
