

Information, Insight, and the Problem With Parameters – Feature Column

Skip to content

Information, Insight, and the Problem With Parameters

In:

2026
, 
Anil Venkatesh
, 
Probability and Statistics

Tagged:

data visualization
, 
kernel density estimation
, 
statistics

Could we possibly gain more insight by trading away even more information?

Information, Insight, and the Problem With
Parameters

Anil Venkatesh

Adelphi University

Introduction

I have two data sets for us to consider. Both consist of observations
of a single variable. 
Data Set 1
 holds the daily number of positive
COVID-19 tests in Kings County, NY, since March 2020. 
Data Set 2
 holds
the LYVE1 level of 535 patients—this is the urinalysis concentration of
a certain protein that may relate to the metastasis of pancreatic
cancer.

Line plots of Data Sets 1 and 2.

One of these plots is a lot more informative than the other. When we
plot observations from left to right, there’s an implied hypothesis that
the order of the observations has an association with the observations
themselves. This is clearly true in the case of positive COVID-19 tests
over time, but it’s clearly false in the case of LYVE1 levels
vs. patient ID. Even if we can identify a trend in the second plot, it
can’t possibly carry any insight.

While both data sets ostensibly only measure one variable, the
COVID-19 data set has an implicit time-ordering that allows us to
visualize it in two dimensions. With no second variable in the
urinalysis data set, we’re stuck building a one-dimensional scatter plot
(is that a mathematical koan?) We can certainly mark a number line at
each value that’s contained in the data set, but let’s extend these
marks into vertical lines for readability.

Novelty plot (or one-dimensional scatterplot) of the
urinalysis data set.

While this visualization of LYVE1 levels no longer implies a spurious
association with patient ID, it hasn’t greatly improved our insight
about the data. As you look at this barcode-like plot, you can’t help
but allow some of the lines to run together into blobs. Aggregating like
this does lose some information, but it allows you to gain a little
insight about the ranges of values of LYVE1 that are most commonly
represented in the data set. In jargon: aggregating nearby observations
gives an approximate measurement of the 
density function
 of the
LYVE1 variable. Could we possibly gain more insight by trading away even
more information?

Histogram representations of LYVE1 (various bin
widths).

A 
histogram
 does exactly this: break up the axis into bins
of equal width, then count the number of observations in each bin and
plot these counts. The choice of bin width has a profound effect on the
visualization and attendant insights (or lack thereof). While widening
the bins can smooth out the random jiggles of the observations, when
taken too far it inevitably smooths out the entire data set into a blob.
As we saw before, narrowing the bins too aggressively results in a
nearly useless barcode pattern. Is there such thing as a perfect bin
width? Students of calculus will recall that any continuous function on
a closed and bounded interval attains a maximum somewhere in that
interval; here, we wish to know if the “insightfulness” of a histogram
(holistically construed) can be maximized by some certain bin width
between 0 and the range of the data. But is this “insightfulness” a
continuous function of bin width? And if so, can we define it concretely
enough to solve the optimization problem?

Much research has been done on the optimal bin width question. As the
default option in Microsoft Excel, Scott’s normal reference rule is
surely the most ubiquitous approach. The rule prescribes a bin width
proportional to $n^{1/3}$, where $n$ is the size of the data set, and
actually gives an exact constant of proportionality as well. The
”insightfulness” function in Scott’s rule is the 
integrated mean
square error
 between the histogram and the true distribution of the
data…or at least, a normal distribution that most closely matches the
data. Other popular rules make similar assumptions about the properties
of the data distribution, sometimes even recovering the $n^{1/3}$ rule but with a
different constant of proportionality. In all these cases, the author
proposed a working definition of insightfulness and then made enough
assumptions about the data in order to reach a closed-form rule for bin
width. Unfortunately, different assumptions arrive at different
formulas! This means that we are still stuck making a choice.

The Problem With
Parameters

A mathematical model that requires the user to choose a value (like
bin width) is called a 
parametric
 model, i.e. involving one or
more undetermined parameters. Every time we choose the value of a
parameter, we influence the model and potentially change the nature of
the insight that it provides. This means that every parametric model has
the user’s thumb on the scale—a problem if we want to gain unbiased
insight from data. The fewer parameter values we have to pick, the less
our actions will bias the results, right? In what circumstances can we
opt out of choosing a parameter value entirely?

Before we go any further, I have some bad news about the parameter
space of histograms. While we’ve been doing our best to pick a good bin
width, there’s been another parameter lurking in the shadows. What about
sliding all the bins left or right? This “bin offset” parameter can
clearly affect the visualization as observations hop from one bin to
another. One option is to place the bins arbitrarily and hope that the
result is good enough, but let’s consider a way of entirely opting out
of this parameter choice. With apologies to 
Pólya
, I humbly
propose: 
When you have two things to say, instead say infinitely
many things and take the average.

Histogram of LYVE1 together with its offset-averaged
curve.

By averaging histograms across all possible bin offsets, we
successfully correct for much of the edge effects inherent to the
histogram. If a cluster of observations happens to land right on the
edge of a bin, this may substantially distort the histogram but it won’t
upset the offset-averaged curve. While we built this curve by thinking
about sliding the histogram bins around, it can be constructed
equivalently by defining a triangular function of height 1 and base of 2
bin widths, then centering a copy of this function at each data point
and adding everything up (that’s a nice exercise to work out!)
Formulated this way, we’ve actually described an example of 
kernel
density estimation
 (KDE). A 
kernel
 is a family of
functions that smoothly transitions from an infinitesimally narrow spike
to a wide, flat form. Generally, we want the integral of the kernel to
remain constant throughout this transition. This makes the kernel a
model of diffusion of mass or heat from a point source to the
surrounding environment.

Five members of a triangle kernel family of mass
1.

In kernel density estimation, we center an identical kernel at each
data point and then allow all the kernels to begin transitioning,
intermingling with each other as they collectively disperse their mass.
When configured well, KDE yields smooth, highly interpretable density
curves. It is implemented by Python’s seaborn library as a standalone
function and an optional argument when forming a histogram, and by a
built-in function in R. As the underlying concept of heat diffusion
works in any ambient dimension, KDE can also be used on multidimensional
data and is particularly good for heatmap visualizations over two
predictor variables.

Kernel density estimates of LYVE1 (various diffusion
times).

Depending on how long we allow the diffusion process to run, a
variety of KDE models can result (and they’re suspiciously reminiscent
of the variety of histograms we saw before.) Clearly, it all comes down
to when we choose to hit “pause.” If we stop too soon, the kernels will
not have had enough time to intermingle and a sparse, jagged form will
result. If we stop too late, the kernels will have distributed their
mass into one big blob (or even worse, a big flat pancake). Just as with
bin width optimization, there is a body of literature on the optimal
dispersion time in KDE. However, another more serious problem
arises: the optimal dispersion time depends on the local density of the
data. In portions of the data set with many closely-packed data points,
the kernels intermingle rapidly to form one dense clump; by comparison,
the kernels of isolated data points take a lot longer to intermingle
with the others. Generally speaking, dispersion time should be longer
wherever the data set is sparse, and shorter wherever the data set is
dense. But…I thought the whole point of KDE was to estimate the density
of the data! If the optimal KDE algorithm requires prior knowledge of
the density of the data, then what are we even doing here?

Illustration of mixing time depending on local
density.

Each row of this heatmap is a stage of KDE, normalized by its maximum
value. Reading from the bottom, we see how the white (high-density)
kernels disperse and gradually merge with surrounding regions. Note that
tight clusters of kernels merge together much faster than isolated
kernels. This effect is particularly pronounced in data sets with many
repeated values, a common feature of medical and sociological data
because of the prevalence of ordinal, non-numeric attributes
(e.g. Likert scale, Apgar score).

In Search of
Insight

In principle, the optimal KDE model might need a distinct
diffusion-rate parameter 
for each data instance
. What started
as an effort to remove an unwanted parameter has now saddled us with
more parameters than we know what to do with! This brings us all the way
back to the humble histogram with its bin width parameter, together with
a light touch of KDE to smooth out the offset bias. If there’s a moral
here, it’s this: to gain insight, you must lose information.

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like this:
Like

Loading…

2026-01-01

Previous Post: 
Everything I Need to Know About Polygons I Learned from My Pre-Kindergartner
Next Post: 
Does Mathematics Progress?

Leave a Reply 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.

Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*

HTML tags are not allowed.
Name 
*

Email 
*

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

85,090 Spambots Blocked by 
Simple Comments

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.
 Notify me of followup comments via e-mail. You can also 
subscribe
 without commenting.

JavaScript must be turned on to leave a comment.

Search
Subscribe to Feature Column via Email

Enter your email address to subscribe to Feature Column and receive notifications of new posts by email.

							Email Address						

							Subscribe						

Recent Posts
Another Look at Circles and Squares

The Shapley Value, or How to Split a Bill in n! Easy Steps

The Story Your Ballot Doesn’t Tell

Weekly Maintenance Message

Puzzling Like the Seventeenth Century

Categories

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Adam A. Smith

Adriana Salerno

Algebra and Number Theory

Allechar Serrano López

Anil Venkatesh

Anna Haensch

Archive

Audrey St. John

Bevin Maultsby

Bianca Thompson

Bill Casselman

Colm Mulcahy

Courtney Gibbons

David Austin

Deepayan Sarkar

Diana Davis

Discrete Math and Combinatorics

Étienne Ghys

Geometry and Topology

Guillermo Fereyra

History of mathematics

Holley Friedlander

Jessica Sidman

John Eggers

Joseph Malkevitch

Josh Leys

Math and Arts/Humanities

Math and Social Sciences

Math and Technology

Math and the Sciences

Mathematics and Biology

Moira Chas

Noah Giansiracusa

Patrick Ion

Probability and Statistics

Real and Complex Analysis

Sara Chari

Sara Stoudt

Sarah Wolff

Steven H. Weintraub

Sunil Chebolu

Tamsyn Morrill

Teaching and Learning Mathematics

Tony Phillips

Uncategorized

Ursula Whitcher

Tags
5G

Alan Turing

algebraic geometry

ams

astronauts

Branko Grünbaum

cantor set

chess

Claude Shannon

computability

cryptography

Desargues

economics

elliptic curves

epidemic

Euclidean geometry

feature column history

games

game theory

generating functions

genetics

Geoffrey Colin Shephard

herd immunity

Higgs boson

information theory

lattices (groups)

Lie groups

Machine learning

measles

medieval

partitions

periods

persi diaconis

physics

poetry

polytopes and polyhedra

primes

probability

SEIR model

statistics

string theory

tic-tac-toe

tilings

video games

voting

Meta

Log in

Entries feed

Comments feed

WordPress.org

					 Designed using 
Hoot Business
. Powered by 
WordPress
.				

%d

