All right, welcome everybody. My name is Ash Wenitesh. I'm the Robert and Louisa Fenholtz professor in the school of mathematics here. And what we're going to do today is discuss a I think somewhat unusual seminar that we had this year at the institute called mathematical folklore. So what's going to happen I most of this hour will be a discussion uh of us on stage so you can get some different perspectives on this. I'm just going to speak for a few short minutes to to give you some context about the seminar so that discussion makes more sense. Okay. So this is the group of the valiant attendees some of whom are here who made it to the very last session. So every week a group of us and mainly mathematicians but not only we had professional writers who write about mathematics. We had historians. We would read a collection of historical texts that were both about and around mathematics and we would discuss them. Okay? Okay. So, historical means we went as far back as ancient Greece, but a lot of a lot from the 1600s, a lot from the 1800s. And about and around means that we were reading both the mathematical texts, but also we were reading the same mathematicians writing about the world outside of mathematics as well as people who weren't mathematicians looking in uh and commenting on mathematics. So we took a broad view of what we were doing and I think this is not the most obvious topic for a seminar for a collection of mathematicians. Right? This is not cutting edge mathematics. It's deliberately the exact opposite of cutting edge mathematics. So I hope we will maybe in our discussion touch on why we thought that was a a useful thing to do. But I just want to very show you I want to show you very briefly now one of the readings just so you get a sense what it feels like to be reading this material and the type of discussion we were having. Okay. So this is Isaac Newton. Okay. And on the right you have his famous text the mathematical principles of natural philosophy which we read significant parts of. And this particular page is a very important moment. It corresponds to an important moment in the history of science. It is where Newton deres the inverse square law of gravity from the observed motion of the planets. Okay. Now this is even now it's a very sophisticated piece of mathematics. Okay. When I I I took an undergraduate course that was touching on this matter and they skipped this derivation because it was thought that the students wouldn't follow it. So even now it's a difficult piece of mathematics when you look at it. I think something that is very striking is that there are no equations. Okay, there are no equations. The the derivation is longer than this and there are a couple on the next page but very few. This looks utterly unlike any modern treatment of the same material. And the work that if if you were to read a modern piece of math text that was covering similar ideas, the work that would be done by the equations is done here by that picture. Okay? So when I was reading this text, I had to effectively learn a new language. I'm fairly fluent in reading equations, but I had to learn this new or maybe rather old language of how that information is coded in that diagram. Okay, so that's a very um interesting experience. And when you read this text, you know, you read it for 50 pages or whatever, you really start to wonder why did Newton choose to express it this way? Okay, it was most certainly a choice to write this in in such a strongly geometric way. And I don't want to answer that question, but I just want to say to that you cannot even I think start to think about that question just by reading Newton the mathematician. Okay, you can't you can read this whole book and you can't understand why is it written in this way. If you want to understand that, you have to look around. You have to look at the culture that Newton was in, right? It's part of a debate about what is the proper role of mathematics in the natural sciences. What is the proper way of gaining certainty? And you have to look at Newton not just as a mathematician but as a human being. Okay? And he was a very singular human being who was extremely interested in theology and alchemy and the occult, possibly more interested than he was in his scientific work. Okay. So here here's a another text we look at. This is Newton's um very detailed commentary on prophecy in the Bible which he took very seriously and that part of Newton is relevant for understanding why this Principia is written the way it is. Okay, th those two things I think uh are not disconnected and that was in a way the theme of our seminar is not solely to read this mathematical um works but try to learn how they were coming out of the culture and the human questions that surrounded them. And so that's the examp that's a this is an example of the type of reading and discussion we would have. Okay, so I'm now going to introduce everyone on stage and then we will pass to a discussion and I will start furthest from me. We have David Nerburgg who is the Leon Levy professor here at the institute and the director and he will moderate the discussion among the remaining four of us who were the regular attendees of the seminar. David was a interested supporter of our seminar. We have Karen Olenbeck who is a distinguished visiting professor in the school of mathematics and one of our regular attendees. Govin Maynon who is the Eric Ellenuk fellow in the school of mathematics for the year and visiting us from Brown University and he was my co-organizer of the seminar. So every week he and I would you know spend the weekends pouring through old material trying to figure out often with the help of our attendees what we should read for the coming week. And finally Alma Steinart who is the Robert Digraph member in the school of historical studies. social sciences. &gt;&gt; So sorry, she's a Robert Digraph member in the school of social sciences and the reason I got confused is she is visiting us from the history department at Columbia University. Okay. So I will now pass over to David and uh we will have we'll discuss for about 40 minutes and then hopefully we'll have some time for Q&amp;A at the end. Thank you um Ashai and I have to say this this was a really splendid seminar that everyone was speaking about and even people who didn't go to the seminar we're talking about the seminar uh from the point of view of a director and director is really means border collie so my my role is just to nip at the heels of unruly uh this is also a fulfillment um rather than an aberration I mean it's true that this isn't the normal topic of mass summer But it's a fulfillment of the direct first director's vision because Abraham Flexner wrote before there was any school of mathematics in 1932 he was thinking about what the institute should be like and he said if there is to be a school of mathematics he knew there would be it should be as broad as possible in its interest it should be just as hospitable he writes to the history of mathematics and the philosophy of mathematics as it is to the practice of mathematics. So congratulations on fulfilling that director's vision. My first question is uh really there were so many diverse materials you read, so many different topics ranging from second wave feminism to 16th cent 17th century theology to reman to what for each of you what was the most important I hate to use the word takeaway but what really struck you the most what transformed your own engagement with your field the most and maybe we could start with with Alma So I should start by first saying that as as Aisha said I'm an historian so I was kind of the interloper and I'm very thankful that I was allowed to sit in the seminar. Um but that's kind of just pointing it out because that's how I approached that as a historian in the seminar. I think that for me one of the it's something that actually already pointed to there's two things that I think that were kind of stood out to me uh during this uh this past year. Um, one was this interested there's this ongoing conversation. I think it came up almost every week. Um, when we read the text, there's an attention to the text itself and how much uh many of the authors that we read uh you would read kind of the mathematical content but uh just part of as part of the text itself there was also uh what we think about as epistemological questions. There were philosophical questions, some some theological questions, sometimes kind of narrative explanation. Um and this is something that I think that kind of the seminar kept coming back to it and I think partly because it's so foreign uh to contemporary mathematician. Uh it looked nothing like what a modern mathematical paper that if you pick up would look like. Um and I think that's was that I think was a source of interest. Um and it also raises a question how things if things looks different in the past how could things potentially look different in the future. Right? that the that the mathematical text and mathematical proof, a mathematical paper must not look the way it looks like right now. Um and I think that was kind of one of the things that kind of keep kept coming up and I thought very interesting. Um the only other things that I you know this is that kind of came to me throughout the year and I think that is because I had uh the good fortune actually this year to be surrounded in the school of the kind of the school of social sciences. I had the fortune to be surrounded by a lot of political theorists and at the end of the year I kept thinking about in fact that what um a lot of what you're doing was quite similar in the same way that political theorists have certain texts like you know you go back and you read hobbs you go back and you read Rouso and you go back and you read mil and and in a way I kept thinking that in some sense uh in this in this in the text you you you come back to it and you find new things in the text and I kept thinking in some way this is what you are doing uh that's a lot of what the mathematicians were doing they're going back back to old text doing kind of uh exesus and they're looking and they're trying to figure out right what what was Newton kind of thinking how he came about thinking the way he were thinking about this problem and what can then tell us right now tell mathematician right now so those to me are kind of the two main things that came up this year &gt;&gt; go so uh well so first of all I think my takeaway is just like the joy of participating in this experience for the entire here uh for kind of working with ash and to create something you know to have such a broad community in the room. Um I've been thinking about uh AI now for about 10 to 15 years. Um and you know I I I think very carefully about kind of ideas individuals institutions where we're going. Um for me since you know I'm not a pure mathematician I'm you know I'm as far I'm really an impure mathematician. I'm I'm like extremely promiscuous intellectually. Uh and so you know for me this was just delightful just to kind of share that uh attitude like let's say you know bring a little bit of brown um to to the IAS. I think uh the first semester for me was a little bit somehow easier because I think that was the common meeting space uh between Akshay and me. Uh we were building up in some ways to an intellectual history of the computer by thinking about uh in some ways kind of parallel foundational crises uh over the 19th century both in the nature of mathematics you know uh in terms of kind of geometry the evolution of geometry uh but also uh thinking more carefully about the character of physical laws. So we read Maxwell, we read Mark. Uh and so uh despite kind of being familiar with the material in in a sense, what I really found uh was common themes across uh the thinkers. So for example, Reman is looking back to Kant. Um Mark uh is detested by Lenin. So you know this this kind of sense of science evolving um Maxwell's use of faith in his famous paper of of molecules uh in in in the spring semester I think uh if I were really to point to two things um that really altered my view. So one of them was certainly reading Newton uh very carefully. I felt like um I unlearned like I grew up in mechanical engineering and so in some ways I feel like I've been working with Newton's laws uh since the early 90s. uh but somehow there was a complete shift in how I thought about it because of reading the original sources and and uh you know in terms of um I would say the understanding of faith the understanding of kind of the nature of institutions uh reading Newton's heretical I mean heresy his work on the prophecies of Daniel kind of recognizing um his spiritual engine like where his intensity. So his when you read Newton his work, it takes a little while to get into it, but at some point he pops off the page and kind of enters your imagination, becomes a living creature and he's intense. It's just like there's a powerful intensity uh I felt uh when reading Newton. So I I felt like the seminar was like that, you know. So there there are there is for me the sense of mathematics being going through a period of rapid change at the current uh time. Our institutions being in crisis, the world being in crisis and mathematics just being this source of continuity, this continuous knowledge taking us back uh across centuries. I did bring a couple of anecdotes because there's something else that I really liked and this is really thanks to Alma. So, you know, when you have a historian in the room, they come and give you this treasure trove of material. And this treasure trove uh in in this case was correspondence between Norman Steamrod and Wilder um was a mathematician at the University of Michigan. And I've actually been using Steamrod's fiber bundles like today because it's actually the right structure you need for deep learning, believe it or not. Yeah. Oh, sorry. Norman Streenrod was a first rate mathematician. You know, he uh uh was on the faculty of Princeton in in the 1950s and 1960s. I think he may have died a little bit young. A founding father uh a founding figure in topology. Also, I would say one of the first really homegrown American mathematicians. Uh he um is workingass. He um is working in a die factory in Dayton, Ohio. uh and he has this correspondence with his mentor at the University of Michigan. So he begins at the University of Miami uh Oxford, Ohio. Then after two years he goes to Michigan and there's a correspondence between the two of them. So it begins with kind of these beautifully handwritten letters from Steamrod uh to Wilder. It begins with dear sir and then 30 years later uh you know the last letter is uh a nomination letter for steamrods Guggenheim and you know then it's uh it shifts and you know Steamrod is referring to Wilder as Ray but the uh when you read Steamrod's mathematics it it looks dry um maybe uh it's not all that dry but uh when you read his letters you you see this kind of intense young working class kid depression era who's just really really passionate about mathematics and I just want to write you know read one sentence um or two sentences uh so this is from steamrod's first letter August 17th 1932 it's an excerpt from a letter he sends to and he says if you care to hang on to theorems I have sent you I assure you it's quite all right I don't need them you see they are emlazed on my mind indelibly in blood and sweat. So you see his passion coming through. Uh in August 9 1933 he says also I've been thinking a bit on the foundations question the upshot of which is that I desire to know fervently what math is all about. Like everyone else I am much interested in the meaning of uh existence. Then he leads into a discussion of sense data and inference which is pretty much what we were discussing in 19th century math. First impressions of Princeton November 18th 1934. This is a leisurely joint. It took them two weeks to get started. It was a month before they put me to work. My job breaks into two parts. One, sitting in the library two nights per week. Two, checking over manuscripts for the annals. The library work is of course no burden. The only thing the place lacks are spatons. A fellow can't have his chew. So, Wilder replies, "Uh, I was amused how soon you concluded what a leisurely place Princeton is. One of its virtues, in my opinion. One can get a lot done in an atmosphere like that and hardly realize it. As to your being unable to chew in fine hall, having worked in my younger and more energetic days in machine shops myself, I can realize what a burden this places on you, and I suggest you take up the matter of spatons with the board of trustees. I hear you have a no new library coming up. you know, now that manly men are making that comeback. &gt;&gt; I'm on it. I'm on it. That's the other job of the director, providing spatoon. &gt;&gt; Um, &gt;&gt; anyway, yeah. Um, I also shared Govin's enthusiasm for the for that. Maybe another thing which struck me was we spent a while reading about 19th century geometry and what really stood out to me is how much its roots came from philosophy as much as physics. So we read Reman, Bernard Reman wrote this very uh well he gave a a talk in the 1850s where he introduced what we now call the concept of Remanian geometry which is you know every mathematician and physicist will know it. It's the foundational mathematics of general relativity. But what a lot of what Reman is doing in his paper is he's responding or arguing with Kant. He's saying that we we can't space cannot be constructed in our minds independent of experience because there are mathematically different possibilities for space and and we need that you need some experience to distinguish and and that that theme continues you know so the this philosophical rather than physical idea it's this Reman's paper is picked up by Helmholtz and Helmholtz had been studying vision he's studying vision very carefully and he understands that it's not just a matter of the image on the retina but the way the mind interprets that. And so he thinks what do we need to know the nature of space? And he argues that vision alone is not enough. You have to be able to move. You have to be able to the move uh movement of rigid bodies is necessary to to have a notion of space and that again gets absorbed back into mathematics. Okay. Like Helm Holtz's ideas gets picked up and taken up by Felix Klein and others. But what sort of struck me in all that was that was exactly that the the extent to which they were motivated by philosophical you know how do our senses relate to concepts and ideas that was the the question and I was yeah &gt;&gt; yeah well actually what struck me was overall uh in the past um that um that uh the aspect ect of I don't know whether you want to call it religion or that um uh this starts already with Plato and uh it goes through I mean in particular Kepler was uh very very uh caught in uh um uh h how uh the religious aspects I I don't know whether religion is exactly the right word but the fact is is that um that uh the that the ideas in mathematics are are the only way to get at truth. In fact, um this was um Andre V's sister uh Simone Vy uh wrote some very uh wrote in letters to her brother about how she uh wanted him to explain what he knew uh to the general audience because it was the one way of getting at truth. So I guess religion that's actually better word than than religion that that that mathematics is the way to get at truth and that uh um this is not I mean I think mathematicians uh actually feel this when they do mathematics. Um they uh they they feel that it that somehow or other you're discovering truth. But this comes out to me with one of the things that I've been interested in for a long time which is which is whether mathematics is discovered or invented and in fact if you read uh from the writings of most of the people we read it's really believe to be discovered whereas I actually believe it's invented and in fact I mean when this comes up I always say I mean the point that came to me was is that someone asked me whether Einstein's equations were the way to describe uh the universe. And you know, I I don't really believe that Einstein's equations are a way to describe the universe. They're they're a way of uh of um an inventive way that mathematicians have to describe useful methods of how to do it. So I I feel that I was I was actually not agreeing with a lot of the perspectives of of the past in in that but it was very striking uh that that mathematics is the way to get at truth. I I think I'm going to ask a really um ignorant question keying off something Alma said where she talked about the parallels she saw between humanists who read Rouso or let's say a modern political theorist who reads Rouso and or Rouso himself reading the Greeks and finding in them an entirely new way of thinking about the politics of his own time and uh and mathematicians looking back at these earlier texts and finding what do they find an entirely new way of thinking about the math they already know do you you don't rethink Newton's law because you have experienced it in a new way how far should we push this parallel because I think it's a fascinating aspect religion is an influence on how we think mathematically um philosophy is an influence in how we think and vice versa Kant was responding he he thought he was responding to many ma mathematical advances of his own age um workingclass experience as a you know our our lived experience as a background for thinking mathematically but is the analogy robust in that sense or are are these very are you emerging transformed in a very different way than a humanist would emerge transformed that's that that's my for for really um yeah sure well maybe I don't know enough about the humanist experience of this but you do I I I want to say one does learned something when one reads Newton I learned something I feel like I learned geometry I I learned something new about geometry that I didn't know before now so the and as you see the mathematical languages change over time um and that in some ways one gains something by this change but you see that you also lose something the older languages were adapted to a different set of things so you you do really learn And I think in as a mathematician um and of course the second aspect is you is you have a different view a different narrative of the origin of everything which really I think influences the way you think about what should I be doing &gt;&gt; um but but also even at the technical level I learned a lot &gt;&gt; almost since I perverted your words would you like to &gt;&gt; I'm not a mathematician right so um but I did but I've I've read um I've looked in the archives enough and I've read enough mathematician and I found more than once mathematician who had a history I mean there is a tradition mathematician kind of going back to history um and I found more than once mathematician explaining that part of it um is the reason that there are ideas there that they can then ideas that kind of didn't make that at the time were not ready in some way um and there ideas there that they can then kind of pick up um and again I'm not a mathematician I'm not a practicing mathemat mathematician but I have seen that um notion repeated often enough to believe that there is some truth to it that one can find things uh in the past uh new ways of thinking that can then influence how you what it is that you're doing uh at the time kind of at the moment &gt;&gt; co yeah &gt;&gt; yeah I I think let me put in in terms of kind of uh you know kind of two contrasting tendencies so you know one of course one tendency in the evolution of mathematics is towards higher and higher abstraction and in many ways the kind of formalization program that's taking going going on today the rise of the computer that relates very much to that kind of question is mathematics this game of formal statements so as you're going uh backwards in some ways in time what you're kind of seeing is contextualization so in each case what you have to do is you have to step back as you're reading the text the words are unfamiliar you have a sense for example what you're doing today but you're trying to reimagine the past so I I I think the act of imagination, the kind of mathematical imagination is related in many ways for me uh to the act of the humanistic imagination in the sense that um a lot of math is you know in terms of the way we think of people there is a kind of informal mythmaking right so Newton is a myth I mean there is this man out there somewhere living in my memory now but it's a myth and I think you know the the idea of myth the idea of a kind of you know a kind of communal conscious iousness uh that captures kind of deep roots of the human past. I think you know that should not be alien uh to humanist. And so I find uh again kind of going back to kind of thinking for this moment. I find that the most important aspect for me of the seminar was really kind of trying to bring people to life. having a better imagination for periods and having a better imagination for the evolution of mathematics in in a sense to to have kind of many imaginations for where mathematics may go from here. So I I'd kind of put it more in terms of the inversion towards contextualization rather than the forward tendency towards abstraction. &gt;&gt; Karen, would you like to jump in? &gt;&gt; I'm sorry I'm having trouble understanding. My hearing isn't good. So, uh, I I didn't really quite understand, uh, the question. &gt;&gt; Well, that's not because of your hearing. That's because of the poser of the question. Um, but maybe we could move on and I'm going to ask you a different question. &gt;&gt; No, keep the keep the mic. Now, let's say next year you get to choose um a follow-up seminar on this seminar. So, folklore seminar, the sequel, folk folklore mathematics, the sequel. What theme from what emerged in the uh this past year would you choose to focus on? &gt;&gt; Because there were so many themes this past year I think. &gt;&gt; Yeah, there were so many things. Uh actually I guess I guess I I was I I was left confused by something that is uh in in many cases uh several times especially with women, especially with uh um we had uh uh a discussion about um an individual who uh may have been uh rather exceptional and uh uh and uh I I'm not sure that I actually picked up on and and understood the difference between the major themes that came out of it time by time and the individual uh uh strike the individual uh meaning of uh what uh of what how individual ual people reacted. Uh so it's kind of like the person the person the the the the individual things that people thought about as opposed to the bigger uh schemes of things. I mean, this came out a lot with the women in math business because it was easy to find exceptional examples of women in math and it goes all the way back to however you go and all the way forward to uh I mean Miriam Mountsi and uh so but they were exceptional cases and they weren't really part of a motion whereas when we got to the to the uh women in M the the second wave of feminism, we actually saw a difference in society. So the question is is that what what where are the differences or where are the big changes coming about and where are the isolated examples of things that happen? Um this was I mean uh this is this is relevant to AI too because the question is is this a major change in the way we think which I think most of us think it is but or or is it uh one of these idiosyncratic things that uh someone uh uh started up on an idea and uh then it's going to peter out. So, uh, so anyway, that that was that was the thing that that struck me. And actually, I have to admit, we had an awful lot of reading, and I'm afraid I didn't read all that much of it. Anyway, thank you. I mean, I come from a discipline where it's all about reading. I was kind of shocked by how much reading you guys were assigning. I just um the theme you would choose &gt;&gt; I don't know if I have a theme but just to follow up on um it was very Alma described herself as an interloper I would say she was a beloved interloper because it was so important for us to have historians in this one way is to help with what Karen said to try to tie the particular to the general right that that's not something where um another way if you if Coven mentioned um Steinrod Norman Steinrod. Now Alma found for us this this whole archive of letters between Steinrod and his adviser. That's not a thing as a mathematician you would be inclined to look at. You were study you might be studying the history. You would read the papers, right? Um so you learn a lot by reading correspondence. You learn a lot about the mathematics from reading correspondence. this this guy will write to his undergraduate adviser things he will not write in his papers and it gives you a different understanding of how that math evolved. So I it's not a theme but I I I think something important in the seminar was was having a conversation with with historians because it that opens up things where we don't ordinarily see and that's something I would want to preserve in any future version. It is really interesting how many of the historians at the institute can actually be found at the institute archives studying the history of the discipline itself. That's in my it's not something I'm used to seeing and I think it's a wonderful thing about the mathematical community here. Goen. &gt;&gt; Well, uh I can tell you exactly what I'm doing. I'm scaling math folklore uh when I go back to Brown. Uh and I really mean this. uh so you know I mean Brown has just been through an absolute crisis uh this year and for us our our kind of let's say foundational text uh at the university in terms of the open curriculum uh is a lovely kind of report it's called the Maxwell magazino report uh it was uh uh a report uh by students a kind of committee of students in the late 1960s which basically led to the open curriculum at Brown so that's the original text for the undergraduate education uh at the university and one of the things that's happened over the past 20 years is now 15% of the undergrads at Brown are doing flight math so they're coming through my department and what I want is every single student to read this text and for us to discuss it so uh I'm still figuring out how I'm going to do it but I'm basically thinking I'm going to do like a mechanical Turk experiment with like 100 undergrads like AI assisted research you know all the problems that I had from the seminar like you know all the stuff I'm thinking about all my impure thoughts I'm going to give it to these young people and we're going to crank it out. So, you know, I'm betting against the PhD model. I'm betting against like the higher science model. I want to try it out. So, you know, just a warning about assigning impure thoughts to your young people. Socrates was executed for precisely that. &gt;&gt; Well, Newton is my favorite heretic. So, &gt;&gt; I have better manners. I think that uh for me um it's something that actually just said when you was talking about um looking at 19th century and how much a lot of these mathematicians were in conversation with the philosophers uh and also with the logicians. I I think that the question that you know if you um for for a potential for a potential seminar is is really to try and bring those texts together to read them together in parallel. uh what will happen if you try to uh we our our seminar was very undisiplined and I enjoyed it because we you know very un for the historian you know we are in the 17th century one week and then we'll jump to the 20th and go back to the 16 and you know we it was it's quite interesting in a sense uh I I really did enjoy it but I I wonder if you if you try to stick to a kind of period and then read within a period uh different texts uh and try to kind of recreate a conversation uh what would that look like in some way &gt;&gt; I sign me up for all of them. I'm going to come and advance the slide because Alma said something really important and I happen to have a text that works for that that historians mathematicians have often turned to history. And so I want to um tell you about very briefly and then invite um a question about a previous altercation between mathematicians and the director of the institute. you know, clearly on my mind. Um, in 1941, Idelot, the director of the institute, wrote in his, uh, annual report that, uh, he was very proud of the school of math for its contributions to the war efforts in calculating ballistics and helping with, you know, bombs and that although the activities of the humanist of the humanists were entirely different, he was proud of them, too. Okay. Um Marston Morris and John Fonoyman objected and they they both wrote letters. I'm going to just quote from Marston Morse. Um Marston Morris says u it seems to me that um he I do not believe that the traditional influence of mathematics, its purpose or its associations are entirely different from the influence, purposes or associations of the humanities. And then it goes on, mathematics is both an art and a science. In spirit, we mathematicians at the institute would cast our lot in with the humanists. Mathematicians are the freest and most fiercely individualistic of artists. They're subject to no limitations of materials or instruments. Their direction at any time is largely determined by their tastes and intellectual curiosity. Their studies are really the studies of the human mind. So there's been many periods as Alma as Alma just suggested in the history of mathematics where where mathematicians have suddenly become sharply aware that mathemat studies are really the studies of the human mind. the foundation crisis that you alluded to and many other periods. Why now? Why what is it about this particular period? And Goen, I think you said a couple of things. You hinted at a couple of things and I think Karen, you did too when you talked about AI, but what is it about the now that has energized your turn towards this question of the humanist mathematician? Um, and now I'm stuck on order. Karen, why don't you go first? &gt;&gt; Okay. Well, that's interesting. Uh, actually, it isn't now for me. I still have a memory, a vivid memory of being eight years old and um, uh, walking down a particular hall in a particular building in our house in a particular spot in our house. We'd move, we moved there, so it might have been the cause of it. when I suddenly started worrying about what time was. And uh I still worry about time. I don't I don't I mean I worry about it maybe even more than I do about uh death or you know this sort of thing. Uh and uh so for me uh and for me actually the questions weren't new. I mean uh I uh I I've I've always been interested in this idea of whether mathematics is discovered or invented and uh um I always uh also I I I don't I mean I also al also the interesting aspect about ma mathematics is is that uh it's it's it it's soothing. It's a way I mean I uh when I can't when I can't do math I do crossword puzzles but I but I I uh I find mathematics a a a very comforting discipline to go into and uh so uh I I for me I don't think the questions were actually new. So, but I think AI is a well I think we're already in crisis because I mean I think it comes before AI. It comes from the fact that uh truth has gone out the window. that is uh if you think something you can find it on the internet and so this is uh people uh and and so the idea of of things of the notion of truth is just gone out the window and I feel that it's already brought us into crisis and uh I don't know whether AI it'll be worse or better but I feel we're already in crisis before AI always already in crisis. Akshai for you. Why now? &gt;&gt; I agree with a lot of what Karen just said and also one of the nice things about the seminar is learning that this is a continuous stream of of thought like mathematicians have have been thinking about these issues forever. But um why why now I I think we've mentioned AI. I I think the prof research mathematics is entering a period of crisis uh because AI will change the way we do things and I'm I'm very optimistic about the future of the discipline but I think it has to go through a crisis which is really a crisis of values. uh we have to decide which parts of what we're doing we're willing to relegate to machines and which part we think is of human value and we should keep doing even if machines can do them we want to do them and so for that we really I think have to look at what is the human part of of mathematics and and in a sense that's what we were providing an intellectual basis for in the seminar I would say &gt;&gt; go then &gt;&gt; so um um you know I I I believe very strongly in kind of Caner's uh sense that the essence of mathematics is lies in its freedom and I think it's critically important to me that u young people have the opportunities that people like I had. I mean like for me I feel like that kid in slum dog millionaire sitting here like you know I was a mechanical engineer all I wanted to do is math and like one day you actually make it and so you know that's amazing. So I I want uh our our younger people to have that form of opportunity. Uh I see my role in mathematics very much as as steward. You know, we've had a good run and you know there's a spirit. There's an essence of the discipline uh that must be that must be preserved. And this is a human spirit. It's it's a it's an antidote uh I think to the tribalism that assales us. I mean mathematics is not on the left or the right. It's above. It's something uh that's common um uh to be shared uh to be to be kind of um you know cherished and I I think at the same time we are going through uh you know uh the 1950s are for me the most fertile era of applied math that's when the discipline really gets formed and there are many parallels between the 1950s and today you know kind of uh crumbling global order kind of new technology coming along uh you know faith or absence of faith in the establishment. So you know we are in a situation where a large fraction of this nation uh does not believe in universities. Um the scientific establishment at large has been challenged and I think it's more to recognize that mathematics is in some sense a hard backs stop. So like the idea that mathematics has this backbone of truth you know it kind of informs statistical truth which informs you know let's say bioatist statistical truth and so on. So there's a sense in which the score has to be preserved but the score core is preserved by uncompromising human beings and you know somehow uh there's a fragility to that that we must recognize uh people are overwhelmed uh by so many tasks you know I you know there are days when I'm like I don't want to write another reference letter in my life you know like this just like this stuff that you have to do for the profession which takes you away from your creative years. And so I I feel like these issues have to be resolved, but they cannot be resolved from a committee up top. They have to be resolved by conversations, common spaces where people do participate in local actions that push us towards the positive. So I think that's that's where I'm I'm coming from on this. But, you know, I I think it's really I'm optimistic. I mean, you know, uh, freedom of math, it's like you don't want to bet against this. It's incredible. &gt;&gt; Amma, you have the last word on the why now. &gt;&gt; I mean, this is the question the historian always asks, right? So when you I mean as you said there have been other moments in the past the foundational crisis which is this I think we we referenced a few time but this is the moment at the end of the 19th century beginning 20th century that a mathematicians become very worried about um that mathematics is built on uh the basis of mathematics is certain. So if you think of kind of they have this idea of the mathematical tree. So if you want to make sure that everything is truth how do you know that this kind of you know the roots that that it's rooted in truth. Um and people start asking basic question like what is number? what is what is what is uh you know what is a point what is a line etc etc and like I said philosophers mathematicians logicians are asking those questions and what historians have done has shown that this moment is part of and you you can tie that uh to a much broader kind of modernist moment that you can see these questions uh both in modernist practice in art but uh ideas in philosophical thoughts uh physiology in science more broadly so historians are that's what we do I mean it's funny that you brought Marston Morris so uh Morris for example just two years before he writes this p this this letter um he uh as he and another mathematician called um Marshall Stone uh advocate this is just as kind of the war starts uh just before the US actually even entered the war and they feel that the mathematicians specifically the pure mathematicians in United States are not taken seriously enough and are not being um uh used smartly by what they think is the scientific establishment and They form a committee and they go and they knock on doors and they uh actively try to make sure that what they think is kind of the the scientific the mathematical knowledge is being used for for defense purposes for defense research. But Morris has this moment already here and you see it even more so later on that he feels like oh no all this suddenly when the canal defense research start and he starts really worrying that mathemat mathematics is going to become completely utilitarian that this all this money that's been funded to defense research uh that is what's going to be the mathematics after the war which I think is why he becomes so such an important advocate to this view of mathematics as both art and science and he writes beautifully about that uh uh even later on. Um so now we're getting back to the current moment, right? Which is the question is what is it about today outside of mathematics? Um and I think that I mean there are many answers. We already heard a few answers. To me it seems like if we want to use mathematics um to think about the current moment we can actually use this notion of mathematics as as as uh humanities and science and to think about that in one hand this is part of the moment uh I think in universities more broadly that there is um questioning of the utility of humanities there's an attack on the humanities and this notion of what is this knowledge for what's the purpose what's how should we think about uh human humanistic uh humanistic endeavor and we have that in mathematics But in that sense mathematicians uh the kind of humanistic part of mathematics has to account for that as well. uh at the same time that in the sciences we have this moment that comes partly from this uh computerization and AI of routinization uh this notion that mathemat mathematical or kind of scientific notion is going to become completely routinized that artificial intelligence is going to change everything uh what is science or what is science without scientists what is science without humans and I think that mathematics actually can talk to both potentially this is what mathematics thinking about mathematics at the current moment where I think this endeavor is soant important can potentially talk to both of these current uh uh current words. &gt;&gt; I hope you are as enraptured by what you've heard as I am. And now you have a chance actually to pose questions. We have some mic runners who will bring you a mic um when you receive the mic please say who you are and then pose your question. There's um I see a hand here and a hand here. Okay. Uh, thanks. My name is Serio. One of you mentioned HOPS. Then I have a question about HOPS and this is the perfect audience. Hobbes famously published a wrong proof of circling the squaring of the circle. Not just he published it, he was proven wrong and he publicly defended it. You think that he was mathematically dumb or he was playing the fool? &gt;&gt; I mentioned Hobbes. I'm not a Hob scholar. Um that being said um I am not going to answer if he was full or not full. I mean but but hops actually the interesting thing about hops I will say is that he has this story right that he read uklid and was very much influenced by uh uclidian proof and that have influenced how he thought about his political theory. So actually in fact Hobbes is an interesting character to think about you know in interesting intellectual where you see how thinking about mathematical idea mathematical certainty influence other um questioning outside of mathematics uh more broadly &gt;&gt; and HubS was also the tutor to Prince Charles II when Charles was just Prince. Charles, as you know, lost his head. So, um, he was his math tutor, though, not his political theory tutor. I just want to stress that. Um, I saw a hand here, too. &gt;&gt; Thank you. I want to &gt;&gt; Could you just say who you are? &gt;&gt; Minata. I want to address the question why did Newton use the graph instead of using equations. So equations have notations and notations are different from one country to another. Linen and him didn't understand each other because some of it was different notations and it also changes with centuries. So if he used equation it he might not be understood 300 years ago. While if he's using these pictures, it's untimely. The the geometry is forever. So it's he was maybe thinking about future. I don't know. You asked why. I said maybe you were thinking about the future that future generations will understand it. &gt;&gt; I I I think he was thinking there was several things, but if anything, I think he might have been thinking about the past. So, so Newton had a I think a great reverence for the idea of ancient wisdom and and the um which you can see in his his uh biblical studies also and the fact that the Greek geometry I think he he he took that very seriously. He uh he very consciously rejected algebra. I think um I I don't I'm not a Newton scholar but I I didn't sense that he was thinking about the future. They may there I think there were issues like how can I absolutely convince my contemporaries that this is correct and I think he thought that uklidian geometry was more convincing to them but &gt;&gt; geometry existed 300 years before me. So it's nature to think that it will exist 300 years from now but it's We don't know. &gt;&gt; I see a question over here. &gt;&gt; Thank you. I'm Joan Scott. Um, this goes back to Karen's question about um the rep the representation of women in mathematics and the exceptional status that you said was attributed to many of them. I wonder if the seminar took up the question of how the mathematician was represented that is um what is it about the representation of the mathematician that um made women exceptions for so for so long and it ties into the quote from Marston Morse who's arguing that mathematics is both an art and a science because in the 19th century women who were advocating for including women in mathematics for teaching mathematics matics in a school curriculum always argued that mathematics was about aesthetics and women were better at that than men were. Um, so I just wonder if the question of representation of who did math came up in your seminar? &gt;&gt; Well, um, I think not. namely I mean I'm always struck by it because I mean when you think about who does who did math in the past it was the elites that is the uh uh the um uh it was not it was not the man in the street it was not the the uh uh people who studied in college or something it was actually very elitist and we didn't really discuss about uh it's very striking how they influenced each other though that is uh um the the you think way back then with Newton and Linets and so forth that they would not have actually uh communicated with each other as much as they did. But they were an elitist group and I think maybe uh in the last I mean in the last uh few years actually a very very few years uh I think it's become a little bit less elitist that is it was more open to more people uh and of course AI may change that completely because uh it who who does math and how they do it may change completely Absolutely. But in the past we we did not discuss this. Okay. &gt;&gt; Any anyone else for Joan's question? &gt;&gt; I missed a week. There was a week that you actually talked about women in ma and right in math. So I I should say I missed that week. Uh I don't know. I mean but uh I know I mean I think that's a very important question, right? The question of the the kind of the representation of the mathematician. It came I think it came out in a roundabout way a little bit uh when we talked about this question of what is the mathematical culture in a given moment right so it's what's it if you're at the 19th century Germany the mathematical culture looks a little bit different if you're in 1930s and you're stinrod and you still have this kind of uh working class and you could still somehow make it uh not easy but somehow make it so so a little bit but not directly I think it came up &gt;&gt; other questions I see any number of hands here on the left &gt;&gt; hands. &gt;&gt; Thanks for being patient. Thank you. &gt;&gt; I'm I'm just wondering if if you know one of the qu things that Karen mentioned about you can log into the internet and you can get an answer to anything. I think the question is is mathematics about knowledge or is it about something else? Is it are you just chasing knowledge all the time? Oh, I don't know. This is unknown. Right? People always say, "Oh, is it known that some automorphism of some group, you know, has this structure?" You're not chasing knowledge. I think when you do math, though that's a sort of a motivating factor, I think math is about really being in a certain state of mind. There's something very attractive about going to a problem, looking at it, and it gives you a sense of peace. as Karen mentioned that there's something about doing math whether it's a young student learning number theory for the first time for him it's cutting edge research but for you that may be trivial but there's another problem which will be cutting edge research for you but it's the actual state of mind the actual joy of doing the math that's important I don't think it's knowledge &gt;&gt; I don't know if that was a question then &gt;&gt; I I I will say that you know it's it's like you know to you know the question of defining math has been with us for a really long time and you know now with the formalization program it's like this reduction like I I would say like every individual mathematician you know beginning with student in in elementary school like they've got their own internal machine and conceptualization of of what it's about. I think the the contexts are completely varied. The the same scientist may have completely different views on why they're doing something. So my favorite example is Kmagorov who has two completely different frameworks for probability theory corresponding to two different phases of his life. So I I would I would hesitate to kind of reduce it to like this is what it's about because I'm still trying to figure it out what it is for myself. So &gt;&gt; did you want to add? &gt;&gt; I just say there's a long &gt;&gt; there's there's a long tradition of thinking about mathematics as uh and there are a lot of thinkers in that um going back to Linet's Pascal that that thinking about mathematics is a way of thinking about the limits of human um human thoughts. uh that it's a way of probing what so it's a way of actually doing mathematics a way of thinking about us as humans and what we what is thinkable and what is knowable that is I mean that is not this this notion is new not new this itself has a long history in some way &gt;&gt; I was going to say that we have time for one more question but actually we don't. So, I'll say what psychoanalysts usually say. I'm afraid our time is up. And I hope you can give our collective thanks.
