                                    JONATHAN HICKMAN

         Abstract. Roughly speaking, the Kakeya Conjecture asks to what extent
         lines which point in diﬀerent directions can be packed together in a small space.
         In R2 , the problem is relatively straightforward and was settled in the 1970s.
         In R3 it is much more diﬃcult and was only recently resolved in a monumental
         and groundbreaking work of Hong Wang and Joshua Zahl. This note describes
         the origins of the Kakeya Conjecture, with a particular focus on its classical
         connections to Fourier analysis, and concludes with a discussion of elements
         of the Wang–Zahl proof. The goal is to give a sense of why the problem is
         considered so central to mathematical analysis, and thereby underscore the
         importance of the Wang–Zahl result.



                                      1. Kakeya sets
1.1. Kakeya’s question. A compact subset of Rn is called a Kakeya set is if it
contains a line segment of length 1 in every possible direction. To avoid ambiguity,
we describe this more formally as follows.
Deﬁnition 1.1. We say a compact set K ⊆ Rn is a Kakeya set if for all directions
ω ∈ S n−1 , there exists a position a ∈ Rn such that the line segment ω,a := {a+tω :
0 ≤ t ≤ 1} satisﬁes ω,a ⊆ K.
   In Figure 1 we illustrate three simple examples of planar Kakeya sets: a disc, an
equilateral triangle and a deltoid. The most instructive is the equilateral triangle.
If we imagine pinning one end of a line segment to the top corner, we can then
sweep it along a 60◦ angle whilst staying within the triangle. This gives 60◦ worth
of directions pointing upwards and 60◦ worth of directions pointing downwards, so
a total of 120◦ of directions. We can do this for all three corners of the triangle to
account for all 360◦ .
   If we compare the areas of the three Kakeya sets in Figure 1, we see they get
successively smaller. In fact, the deltoid has half the area of the disc. This means
that, within the deltoid, we have managed to pack the line segments much more
tightly. In the early twentieth century, Sōichi Kakeya was interested in these shapes
and understanding diﬀerent ways to pack lines into small spaces. From his work, a
natural question arose: what is the smallest possible area of a planar Kakeya set?
1.2. Besicovitch’s surprising answer. Around the same time, Besicovitch was
independently thinking about similar questions. He was able to devise new and
surprising ways to pack lines, which produced planar Kakeya sets with much, much
smaller area than any example seen before. In fact, he was able to show that

   2020 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation. Primary 28A78, 42B99.
   Supported by New Investigator Award UKRI097. This article expands upon the Oberwolfach
snapshot [12]. The author thanks Tony Carbery, Tom Leinster, Betsy Stovall and Joshua Zahl for
helpful comments and feedback on an earlier draft.
                                                1
2                                   JONATHAN HICKMAN




                1                                1                                1




    Area: π4 = 0.785 . . .          Area: √13 = 0.577 . . .           Area: π8 = 0.392 . . .


                      Figure 1. Three examples of Kakeya sets.

              there exist planar Kakeya sets of arbitrarily small area!
That is, for any ε > 0, there exists some Kakeya set K ⊆ R2 with |K| < ε. Here
and below, given E ⊆ Rd for d ∈ N, we let |E| denote the d-dimensional measure
of E.
   How is this possible? How can we pack so many line segments into such a tiny
space?1 To understand this, we go back to the example of the equilateral triangle,
which we denote by . In Figure 2, we carry out the following ‘cut-and-shift’
procedure to arrive at a new shape:
    (a) Cut  into two ‘subtriangles’ 1 and 2 along the vertical midline.
    (b) Shift 1 and 2 horizontally in opposite directions so that they overlap.
The key observation is that, as we cut-and-shift, we do not lose any of the line
segments swept out from the top corner. Furthermore, because of the overlap
between the shifted subtriangles, the new shape has smaller area than . The
procedure therefore results in a shape with smaller area than the equilateral triangle
, but which still contains line segments in 120◦ of directions. This on its own is
not very impressive. However, if we apply the procedure over and over many times,
then we can amplify its eﬀect and arrive at a startling conclusion.
   Rather than cutting  into just two subtriangles, in Figure 3 we cut it into
2m subtriangles for some large value of m ∈ N. As illustrated, we then shift the
subtriangles horizontally, ﬁrst to form pairs, and then to form pairs of pairs, and
then pairs of pairs of pairs and so on. By doing so, we ensure that there is a huge
amount of overlap. At the end of this process, we arrive at a shape K called a
Perron tree, represented in Figure 3d. The huge overlap means that the Perron
tree K has much, much smaller area than the original triangle . By choosing the
number 2m of subtriangles to be very large, and being careful how we shift, we can
ensure that the area of K is as small as we wish. As before, K contains (shifted
versions of) all the line segments spanned by the top corner of , so lines in 120◦
of directions. We can then take three rotated copies of K to form a true Kakeya
set containing line segments pointing in all directions.2
   The Perron tree construction produces a Kakeya set with area smaller than
any prescribed value. In fact, combining these ideas with a limiting argument,
   1 Here we sketch a simpliﬁcation of Besicovitch’s argument. A detailed history of the problem,

together with the precise description of the method, can be found in [9, Chapter 7].
   2 Taking three copies of K will increase the area by a factor of 3, but we can compensate for

this by ensuring that the area of K is three times smaller than our target value.
                                THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                       3




      Cut  into subtriangles 1 , 2 .                Horizontally shift 1 , 2 .

                       Figure 2. The cut-and-shift procedure.


Besicovitch was able to go one step further and show there exist Kakeya sets with
zero area!
Theorem 1.2 (Besicovitch). There exists a Kakeya set K ⊆ R2 with |K| = 0.
   Given a Kakeya set K ⊆ R2 , the product K × [0, 1]n−2 is easily seen to be a
Kakeya set in Rn . Hence, Besicovitch’s theorem also implies that for every n ≥ 2
there exists a Kakeya set K ⊆ Rn with |K| = 0.
   Besicovitch’s construction is undoubtedly striking and beautiful. However,
around the time of their discovery, it is perhaps fair to say that measure zero
Kakeya sets were something of a curiosity. Besicovitch did apply his construction
to solve a problem in integration theory, but beyond this it did not appear to have
much use.
   Mathematical ideas have a wonderful habit of reappearing in new and seemingly
unrelated contexts. What was once thought a curiosity can later emerge as a
profoundly important idea. Kakeya sets are a striking example of this. Fifty years
after Besicovitch’s work, startling discoveries uncovered their true signiﬁcance.

                     2. Convergence of Fourier integrals
2.1. Fourier inversion. Fourier analysis is concerned with representing functions
in terms of sine and cosine waves (or, equivalently, complex exponentials). Ostensi-
bly, this has little to do with the kind of elementary geometric problems discussed
above. However, as we shall see, it is within the world of Fourier analysis that the
true signiﬁcance of Kakeya sets and Besicovitch’s construction comes to light.
   We begin by recalling some of the basic principles of the Fourier theory. Given
f ∈ L1 (Rn ), the Fourier transform is deﬁned by3
                                 
(2.1)                   f(ξ) :=   e−2πix·ξ f (x) dx,   ξ∈R n.
                                  Rn

Here we can think of the R     n notation in (2.1) as simply denoting a copy of Rn .
We include the hat to remind ourselves this is the domain of the Fourier transform,
since later it will be useful to distinguish the domain of f and the domain of f .

    3 Recall that Lp (Rn ) denotes the space of all measurable functions f : Rn → C satisfying
                       1/p
f Lp (Rn ) := Rn |f |p      < ∞.
4                                 JONATHAN HICKMAN




       Cut  into 2m subtriangles.            Horizontally shift to form 2m−1 pairs.




        Form 2m−2 pairs of pairs. . .                   The ﬁnal shape K.

               Figure 3. Perron tree construction of a Kakeya set.

  Roughly speaking, f(ξ) corresponds to the amplitude of the component of f
                                                 n . This leads to the fundamental
which oscillates with ﬁxed frequency vector ξ ∈ R
Fourier inversion formula.
Theorem 2.1 (Fourier inversion formula). If f ∈ L1 (Rn ) and f ∈ L1 (R
                                                                       n ), then
                   
(2.2)      f (x) =     e2πix·ξ f(ξ) dξ for almost every x ∈ Rn .
                         Rn
   The inversion formula is one realisation of the fundamental principle of Fourier
analysis. In particular, under the above hypotheses, (2.2) represents f as a super-
position of simple waves
                                  x → e2πix·ξ f(ξ).
Each simple wave oscillates with a ﬁxed frequency |ξ| and has ﬁxed amplitude f(ξ).
For dimensions n ≥ 2, each wave also has an orientation: the peaks and troughs lie
orthogonal to ξ. See Figure 4.
2.2. Shortcomings of the inversion formula. The hypotheses of Theorem 2.1
require both f ∈ L1 (Rn ) and f ∈ L1 (R   n ). These conditions are natural: we need
f ∈ L (R ) to deﬁne the integral in (2.1) and we need f ∈ L1 (R
      1    n                                                           n ) to deﬁne the
                                                     1 n
integral in (2.2). Despite this, the condition f ∈ L (R ) is, in some sense, restrictive
and a severe limitation on the theory. It requires
                                   
                                       |f(ξ)| dξ < ∞,
                                    n
                                    R

which means f(ξ) has fast decay as |ξ| → ∞. In other words, the high frequency
components of f must have very small amplitude. Intuitively, the graph of such
                             THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                    5



                                   ξ               1
                                  |ξ|             |ξ|


                           +−
                             +−
                               +−
                                 +−
                                   +
        Figure 4. The level sets of the plane wave x → cos(2πx · ξ),
        corresponding to the real part of e2πix·ξ . The alternating bands
        represent regions where the function is either positive or negative.
        The wave has frequency |ξ|, which means that the wavelength (dis-
        tance between consecutive peaks) is 1/|ξ|. Each wave also has an
        orientation: the peaks and troughs lie orthogonal to ξ.


a function cannot have sudden jumps, since jumps require high frequencies. This
forces f to be rather regular, which drastically limits the applicability of Theo-
rem 2.1. Moreover, often in applications of Fourier analysis, it is critical to un-
derstand precisely high frequency behaviour. Since the inversion formula does not
apply to functions with signiﬁcant high frequency components, it is poorly suited
to many of these applications.

2.3. Convergence of Fourier integrals: one dimensional case. Without the
strong hypothesis f ∈ L1 (R    n ), the integral formula in (2.2) is not well deﬁned.
Thus, on the face of it, it is unclear how to make sense of Fourier inversion without
requiring f ∈ L1 (R
                    n ). However, restricting to the n = 1 case, we can still make
sense of the partial Fourier integrals
                                      R
(2.3)                  SR f (x) :=        e2πixξ f(ξ) dξ,  R > 0.
                                     −R

Since the integration now takes place over a bounded interval, the integral in (2.3)
always converges. Moreover, with a small amount of work, (2.3) can be rewritten
as the convolution
                                                              sin(2πRx)
(2.4)        SR f (x) = DR ∗ f (x)        where   DR (x) :=             .
                                                                  πx
The precise formula for DR is not too important for us. However, what is important
is that (2.4) makes no reference to the Fourier transform of f and, consequently,
one can easily show SR f is well deﬁned for any f ∈ Lp (R) for 1 ≤ p < ∞ (in
particular, we no longer require f ∈ L1 (R)). It is natural to ask whether, at this
level of generality, f can be reconstructed from the partial Fourier integrals SR f .
Question 2.2. Does SR f → f as R → ∞?
6                                    JONATHAN HICKMAN


   A positive answer to Question 2.2 acts as a surrogate for the inversion formula
(2.2). However, as stated, the question is somewhat vague. Since we are dealing
with limits of families of functions, there are many diﬀerent modes of convergence
to consider. The following theorem, which combines two foundational results in
Fourier analysis, treats the two most natural modes.
Theorem 2.3 (Riesz [18], Carleson–Hunt [5, 13]). Let 1 < p < ∞ and f ∈ Lp (R).
Then
       i) SR f − f Lp (R) → 0 as R → ∞;
      ii) SR f (x) → f (x) as R → ∞ for almost every x ∈ R.
   Theorem 2.3 represents a sweeping and powerful extension of the inversion for-
mula in the one-dimensional setting. Since the hypotheses only require f ∈ Lp (R)
(and no additional conditions on the Fourier transform), the results apply in great
generality, including to very rough functions. The ﬁrst part of Theorem 2.3, due
to Riesz [18], shows that SR f converges to f with respect to the metric struc-
ture on Lp (R). Since the Lp -norms involve an integral, this can be interpreted as
showing convergence holds ‘on average’. The second result, on almost everywhere
convergence, involves no averaging and is far more subtle. This is the celebrated
Carleson–Hunt theorem [5, 13], a landmark in twentieth century analysis.

2.4. Convergence of Fourier integrals: Higher dimensions. As soon as we
move to higher dimensions, convergence of Fourier integrals becomes a much more
diﬃcult and subtle problem. To begin with, there is no longer a ‘canonical’ choice
of truncation for deﬁning the partial Fourier integrals SR as in (2.3). For instance,
two natural choices are given by the square and ball partial integrals4
                                                            
                          2πix·ξ 
 SRsquare
          f (x) :=       e                        ball
                                f (ξ) dξ and SR f (x) :=             e2πix·ξ f(ξ) dξ,
                     [−R,R]n                                            B(0,R)

respectively. The above deﬁnitions coincide for n = 1, but are diﬀerent beasts in
                                                                      square
higher dimensions. Taking the limit of the partial Fourier integrals SR      f and
SR f as R → ∞ corresponds to two diﬀerent summation methods for f : that is,
  ball

diﬀerent ways to attempt to reconstruct f from its Fourier transform.

Square summation. The summation method for the square partial integrals is rel-
atively easy to understand. In this setting, the one-dimensional theory from Theo-
rem 2.3 extends directly to higher dimensions.
Theorem 2.4. For n ≥ 1, let 1 < p < ∞ and f ∈ Lp (Rn ). Then
            square
       i) SR       f − f Lp (Rn ) → 0 as R → ∞;
           square
      ii) SR      f (x) → f (x) as R → ∞ for almost every x ∈ Rn .
   Since the square [−R, R]n is formed by a product of intervals [−R, R], the square
                            square
partial integral operators SR      have an underlying tensor product structure. Us-
                                             square
ing this, the norm convergence problem for SR       immediately reduces to the n = 1
case. A similar, but this time somewhat non-trivial, reduction applies to almost
everywhere convergence [11]. In this way, Theorem 2.4 can be derived as a corollary
of Theorem 2.3.

    4 Here B(0, R) denotes the Euclidean ball centred at the origin of radius R.
                             THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                  7


Ball summation. In contrast with the previous case, the ball partial integral oper-
        ball
ators SR     do not possess a tensor structure. Consequently, there is no obvious or
easy way to reduce the convergence problem for the ball summation method to the
n = 1 case. This situation is ‘genuinely’ higher dimensional.
                                                         ball
   Understanding the norm convergence problem for SR          was a major open prob-
lem in the 1960s. Using Plancherel’s theorem, it is a trivial matter to see that norm
convergence holds for p = 2; that is,
            ball
           SR    f − f L2 (Rn ) → 0    as R → ∞          for all f ∈ L2 (Rn ).
However, the behaviour for p = 2 is much less clear. It came as a great surprise
when, in 1971, Charles Feﬀerman [10] produced a counterexample showing that
norm convergence holds only in the trivial p = 2 case!
Theorem 2.5 (Feﬀerman [10]). For n ≥ 2 and 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ with p = 2, there exists
some f ∈ Lp (Rn ) such that
                        ball
                       SR    f − f Lp (Rn ) → 0      as R → ∞.
In particular, norm convergence holds only for p = 2.
   Feﬀerman’s theorem also rules out almost everywhere convergence for p = 2.
These results illustrate a remarkable diﬀerence between the square and ball sum-
mation methods. Whilst the square Fourier integrals have a robust convergence
theory and behave just about as well as one could hope for, the ball Fourier inte-
grals behave just about as badly as one could dread!
   Feﬀerman’s theorem is celebrated not only for its startling conclusion, but also
for the powerful ideas used in the proof. In particular, his counterexample relies
heavily on Besicovitch’s construction of a measure zero Kakeya set! Moreover, as
we shall see, the proof of Theorem 2.5 revealed a profound relationship between the
geometry of Kakeya sets and the theory of the Fourier transform in two and higher
dimensions. This marked a tremendous shift in perspective, and the ramiﬁcations
of Feﬀerman’s insight remain a central and intensely active topic of contemporary
research in the modern Fourier analysis and beyond.

  3. Fefferman’s counterexample: Why Kakeya sets are important
   Here we provide a non-rigorous sketch of the proof of Theorem 2.5, focusing on
how Kakeya sets arise in Feﬀerman’s counterexample. We shall focus on the planar
case n = 2, which already contains all the essential ideas. Moreover, once the n = 2
case is known, standard arguments easily lift the result to higher dimensions.
3.1. A low pass ﬁlter. Consider the partial integral operator S := S1ball , given by
                                 
                        Sf (x) =        e2πix·ξ f(ξ) dξ.
                                      B(0,1)

This has a natural interpretation as a low pass ﬁlter. It acts on an input function
f by removing all high frequency components, which corresponds to multiplying
f against the characteristic function χB(0,1) of the unit ball. A basic question
is to understand the continuity of this ﬁltering operation. Given 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞,
the continuity of S on the metric space Lp (R2 ) is equivalent to the existence of a
constant C > 0 such that
(3.1)             Sf Lp (R2 ) ≤ C f Lp (R2 )      for all f ∈ Lp (R2 ).
8                                 JONATHAN HICKMAN


  The question of whether S is continuous on Lp (R2 ) is closely related to the
question of whether Lp convergence
(3.2)         ball
             SR    f − f Lp (R2 ) → 0      as R → ∞       for all f ∈ Lp (R2 )
holds. To understand this relationship, note:
      i) Lp convergence always holds for smooth, rapidly decaying functions g. In-
         deed, in this case g and g are both well behaved and one may establish con-
         vergence via elementary tools such as the inversion formula (Theorem 2.1).
     ii) Any f ∈ Lp (R2 ) can be approximated to arbitrary accuracy in Lp (R2 ) by
         some smooth, rapidly decaying function g ∈ Lp (R2 ).
Together, i) and ii) tell us that the limit identity in (3.2) holds for all f belonging to
a dense subspace of Lp (R2 ). If the operators (SR ball
                                                        )R>0 were (equi)continuous, then
one could take limits and pass from the dense subspace to all Lp (R2 ) functions.
More precisely, suppose we have an inequality of the form
(3.3)              ball
                  SR    f Lp (R2 ) ≤ C f Lp (R2 )   for all f ∈ Lp (R2 ),
where the constant C > 0 is uniform in R. This is a statement about the conti-
                                           ball
nuity of the family of linear operators (SR     )R>0 on Lp (R2 ). Following the above
discussion, the inequality (3.3) implies the Lp convergence result (3.2).
   It turns out that the converse of the above observation is also true. That is, if
Lp convergence result (3.2) holds, then the inequality (3.3) must also be true. This
implication is deeper, relying on the principle of uniform boundedness; we do not
discuss the details here. The key takeaway is that, in order to prove Feﬀerman’s
theorem that the Lp convergence result (3.2) fails, it suﬃces to show that the
inequality (3.3) fails for all p = 2. We shall demonstrate this failure for R = 1, in
which case (3.3) agrees with (3.1). Thus, matters are reduced to showing that
                        the inequality (3.1) fails for all p = 2.
This is the goal for the remainder of the section.
3.2. Elementary properties of the Fourier transform. Feﬀerman’s argument
relies on two elementary properties of the Fourier transform.
The uncertainty principle. Rather than a single result or set of results, the un-
certainty principle is a guiding heuristic which permeates all aspects of Fourier
analysis. Loosely speaking, it says that:
        Localising f in the frequency domain forces f to spread out in the
        spatial domain.
To illustrate this idea on the real line, for a small number r > 0, consider the
scaled Gaussian fr (x) := re−πr x with variance 1/r 2 . Then fr (ξ) = e−πx /r is
                                  2 2                                       2 2


a Gaussian with variance r 2 . The variance of fr and the variance fr satisfy a
reciprocal relationship. By shrinking r, the distribution of fr becomes narrower
(more certain) whilst the distribution of fr becomes wider (more uncertain). This
behaviour is a manifestation of the uncertainty principle.
   We are interested in a two-dimensional variant of the above example. For small
numbers r, s > 0, let θ ⊆ R2 be a rectangle of dimensions r × s, with arbitrary
centre and orientation. We deﬁne the dual rectangle T ⊆ R2 to be the 1/r × 1/s
rectangle centred at the origin with the same orientation as θ. We illustrate this
deﬁnition in Figure 5.
                                  THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                           9




         Figure 5. The uncertainty principle in R2 . The Fourier transform
         gT is a bump adapted to the r × s rectangle θ. The function gT is
         a normalised bump adapted to the 1/r × 1/s dual rectangle T .


   Suppose gT is a function on R2 whose Fourier transform gT is a bump adapted to
the rectangle θ. By this, we mean that gT looks like5 a smoothed out version of the
characteristic function χθ . Then the uncertainty principle tells us that the support
of gT spreads out over the dual rectangle T . This is a two-dimensional analogue
of the Gaussian example above. In particular, if we think of gT as a smoothed out
version of the characteristic function χθ of θ, then, at least morally, |gT | should be
a smoothed out version of the normalised characteristic function |T |−1 χT .67

Translation vs modulation symmetry. Given y ∈ R2 , the Fourier transform inter-
twines the translation and modulation operations
              (τy f )(x) := f (x − y)       and       Mody h(ξ) := e−2πy·ξ h(ξ).
In particular, the integral formula (2.1), together with a change of variables, implies
                                                    
 (τy f )(ξ) =     e −2πix·ξ
                             f (x − y) dx = e−2πiy·ξ
                                                       e−2πix·ξ f (x) dx = Mody f(ξ).
                  Rn                                        Rn

Thus, translating the function f in the physical domain corresponds to modulating
f in the frequency domain.

3.3. The counterexample. We now have all the ingredients we need to sketch
Feﬀerman’s argument. We break the proof into steps.

    5 We intentionally keep the discussion vague here to avoid technicalities. For the purposes of

this exposition, one could simply think of gT = χθ . However, in practice, it is useful to take a
smoothed out version of the characteristic function, since the Fourier transform is poorly behaved
in the presence of discontinuities.
    6 The normalising factor |T |−1 naturally appears owing to the scaling properties of the Fourier

transform. It plays the same role as the r factor in the deﬁnition of fr in the Gaussian example.
    7 This discussion applies to the absolute value |g |. The function g itself carries some oscil-
                                                      T                  T
lation, which is dictated by the location of θ in the frequency domain.
10                                JONATHAN HICKMAN


Step 0 (Recap). We begin by recalling what it is we wish to prove. As above, S
denotes the low pass ﬁlter
                                    
                          Sf (x) :=     e2πix·ξ f(ξ) dξ.
                                        B(0,1)

This removes components of f oscillating with frequency |ξ| > 1. By our earlier
reductions, our goal is to show

(3.4)               Sf Lp (R2 ) ≤ C f Lp (R2 )     for all f ∈ Lp (R2 )

fails whenever p = 2. Suppose, to the contrary, that the inequality (3.4) holds.
What does this tell us?
   The Lp norms are sensitive to the distributional properties (that is, the shape
of the graph) of a given function. Since L∞ functions are by deﬁnition bounded,
their distributions are typically broad and ﬂat. On the other hand, L1 functions
are deﬁned in terms of the convergence of an integral, which requires some decay at
∞, so their distributions are typically tall and narrow. A function in Lp for some
1 < p < ∞ lies in a spectrum between these two extreme cases.
   If the inequality (3.4) were to hold, say for large p > 2, then this would tell us that
the ﬁlter S preserves certain distributional properties of the input. In particular, if
the input function f is broad and ﬂat, then the output function Sf should also be
broad and ﬂat. Therefore, to disprove the inequality, we shall construct an input
function f whose distributional properties change signiﬁcantly under ﬁltering:
        • The input f will have a broad, ﬂat distribution;
        • The output Sf will have a tall, narrow distribution.
This kind of behaviour is incompatible with (3.4) for p > 2 and therefore provides a
counterexample for this exponent regime. A similar dual construction can be used
to rule out (3.4) for p < 2.

Step 1 (Arrange frequency support). We now turn to constructing the counterex-
ample. That is, we set about ﬁnding a function f with the above properties. Fix a
small parameter 0 < r < 1. As illustrated in Figure 6a, we place r × r 2 rectangles
θ tangentially to the unit circle ∂B(0, 1) in the frequency domain R   2 . The choice
of side lengths r × r reﬂects the curvature of the circle: with this choice, the θ can
                     2

be arranged to ﬁt neatly around the circle and form an eﬃcient covering.

Step 2 (Initial physical support). Given θ, let T denote the corresponding 1/r×1/r 2
dual rectangle, which is centred at the origin. The collection of all such dual
rectangles is illustrated in Figure 6b. By the uncertainty principle, we can ﬁnd
a function gT such that gT is a bump adapted to θ and      gT is a normalised bump
adapted to T . We initially consider the function g := T gT . The two sides of
Figure 6 then provide a schematic of the frequency support of g (the support of g
    2 ) and physical support of g (the support of g itself in R2 ).
in R

Step 3 (Rearrange physical support). Using translation vs modulation sym-
metry, by independently modulating each gT , we translate the gT in physical
space. This corresponds to translating the underlying supporting rectangles T . We
rearrange the T so, rather than all passing through the origin, they are disjoint.
Moreover, as illustrated in Figure 7a, we strategically place the T below the base of
                                THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                        11




                                                                  
   Schematic for g =     T . Each gT is       Schematic for g = T gT . Each gT is es-
                        T g
   supported on some r×r2 rectangle θ tan-       sentially supported on a 1/r × 1/r2 rec-
   gent to the boundary of B(0, 1).              tangle T through the origin.


         Figure 6. The function g from Step 2 of Feﬀerman’s construction,
         viewed from both the frequency and physical domain. Each spatial
         rectangle T in Figure 6b is dual to some frequency rectangle θ in
         Figure 6a.

                                                                           
a Perron tree.8 We let fT denote the corresponding translate of gT and f = T fT .
Figure 7a then provides a schematic of the physical support of f .
   Recall that fT is obtained by modulating gT . Modulation does not alter the
support of a function so fT and gT share the same same support.
                                                                  Thus, Figure
                                                                            6a
provides a schematic of the frequency support of both g = T gT and f = T fT .
Step 4 (Apply the operator). We now consider what happens when      we apply the
ﬁlter S to the function f constructed above. By linearity, Sf = T SfT and so it
suﬃces to study the individual fT .
   We ﬁrst describe the action of S from the perspective of the frequency domain.
Recall that fT is supported on a frequency rectangle θ, arranged along the boundary
of the ball as in Figure 6a. The rectangle θ is tangential to the unit circle, and the
ﬁlter S acts by cutting oﬀ frequencies to the unit ball. Consequently, S eﬀectively
cuts the support θ of fT in half.
   We now consider the action of S from the perspective of the spatial domain.
As discussed above, S eﬀectively halves the frequency support of fT . By the
uncertainty principle, halving the frequency support causes the physical support
to double. Consequently, in the spatial domain, each SfT spreads out over a double
of T . This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 7.
Step 5 (Conclusion). As we can see in Figure 7b, the strategic placement of the
rectangles T causes the doubles to pile up on top of one another. Moreover, since
the Perron tree packs lines in diﬀerent directions into a tiny space, the pile up
between the doubles is enormous. This pile up is key.
   From the previous steps we know:

  8 Since a single Perron tree only accounts for lines in 120◦ of directions, in practice we use

multiple rotated Perron trees. However, for the sake of simplicity we ignore this minor detail.
12                                   JONATHAN HICKMAN




                                                                        
     Schematic for f = T fT , viewed in the        Schematic for Sf =       T SfT . Morally,
     physical domain. Each fT is essentially       each SfT is essentially supported on a
     supported in a rectangle T lying below        double of T . The enlarged rectangles
     the Perron tree. These rectangles are         have huge overlap owing to the proper-
     disjoint.                                     ties of the Perron tree.

          Figure 7. Applying the operator S to the function f . The rectan-
          gles on the left represent the support of the input f . The rectangles
          on the right represent the support of the output Sf .

      • The disjoint rectanglesin Figure 7a correspond to the supports of the func-
         tions fT forming f = T fT ;
      • The piled-up doubles in Figure
                                        7b correspond to the supports of the func-
         tions SfT forming Sf = T SfT .
Comparing both sides of Figure 7, we pass from an input function f with a broad,
ﬂat distribution to an output function Sf with a tall, narrow distribution. Thus,
S fails to preserve the distributional properties of the input, and therefore cannot
be bounded on Lp .
   The above argument is a rough sketch, and for the sake of brevity omits some
details.9 Nevertheless, it serves to highlight the essential role of the geometry of
the Kakeya sets in Feﬀerman’s argument. It is only by arranging the rectangles in
relation to (an approximation of) a measure zero Kakeya set that the pile up eﬀect
is suﬃcient to prove the theorem.
   Feﬀerman’s profound discovery showed that the geometry of Kakeya sets un-
derpins Fourier analysis in two and higher dimensions. Since Fourier analysis is
so central to the study of many physical processes, it soon became apparent that
Kakeya sets were also deeply connected to the theory of many important equations
governing the laws of nature. This includes the wave equation, which describes a
diverse range of phenomena such as water waves, seismic waves and sound waves,
and also Schrödinger’s famous equation from quantum mechanics [19, 25]. Kakeya
   9 A signiﬁcant omission is the eﬀect of the oscillation of the individual terms of the sum
      
Sf = T SfT . If there were a lot of destructive interference between the SfT , then this could, in
principle, cancel out the eﬀect of the pile up of the supports. However, it is reasonably straight-
forward to understand and control the oscillation in the proof.
                                THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                           13




                 −R                                                    R               ξ

         Figure 8. A radial slice of mα   R (ξ) := (1 − |ξ| /R ) χB(0,R) (ξ)
                                                           2   2 α

         from the deﬁnition of the Bochner–Riesz means. Here α = 1/4. In
         general, for small α > 0, the function is continuous but fails to be
         smooth around the boundary of the B(0, R).

sets, which were once was a curiosity, suddenly became one of the most important
objects in mathematical analysis!

                      4. The next steps in Fourier analysis
4.1. A possible ﬁx: The Bochner–Riesz Conjecture. Feﬀerman’s example
demonstrated a dramatic and highly unexpected failure of the ball Fourier summa-
tion method. In response to this, the hunt was on for a possible ﬁx. A natural can-
didate is to consider slightly smoothed out versions of the ball summation method.
Given α ≥ 0, we deﬁne the Bochner–Riesz means
                          
             BRα
                 f (x) :=        e2πix·ξ (1 − |ξ|2 /R2 )α f(ξ) dξ, R > 0.
                            B(0,R)
                                           ball
When α = 0, this deﬁnition agrees with SR       f . However, for α > 0, the Bochner–
                α
Riesz mean BR f replaces the rough frequency cutoﬀ χB(0,R) in the deﬁnition of
                                           R (ξ) := χB(0,R) (ξ)(1 − |ξ| /R ) . The
 ball
SR    f with the smoothed out version mα                                2   2 α
                                                                     α
graph of this function is sketched in Figure 8. For α > 0 small, mR is continuous,
but fails to be diﬀerentiable at the boundary of B(0, R). As α increases, it becomes
more and more regular along the boundary of the ball.
   The Bochner–Riesz means provide a natural molliﬁcation of the ball summation
method. Given 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞, this prompts the question of whether
(4.1)         α
             BR f − f Lp (Rn ) → 0         as R → ∞         holds for all f ∈ Lp (Rn ).
As for the ball summation method, Plancherel’s theorem shows (4.1) is trivially
true for p = 2. The Bochner–Riesz Conjecture asserts that, as soon as α > 0, there
is a range10 of exponents p for which (4.1) holds, beyond the trivial p = 2 case.
4.2. A counterexample to the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture? One lesson of
Feﬀerman’s work is that it is healthy to have a good dose of scepticism. Rather
than try to prove a positive result on the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture, we could ﬁrst
try to construct a counterexample.
    As it stands, Feﬀerman’s argument, based on the Perron tree construction of a
Kakeya set of measure zero, is too weak to contradict the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture.
Any tiny additional degree of smoothing (that is, any choice of α > 0) is enough to
dampen and overcome the pile up eﬀect described in §3. But what would happen
if there was a way to construct even smaller Kakeya sets?
   10 The precise statement of the conjecture posits that this should hold for    2n          2n
                                                                                 n+1
                                                                                       < p < n−1 ,
but we shall not concern ourselves with the exact numerology here.
14                                       JONATHAN HICKMAN


   Despite having zero measure, the planar Kakeya set arising from Perron tree
construction is still relatively large: it has dimension 2. Here dimension can either
refer to the Minkowski or the Hausdorﬀ dimension. We shall (brieﬂy and infor-
mally) review these concepts in §5.3 below. For our present purposes, however, it
suﬃces to intuitively think of a 2-dimensional subset of R2 as large and ﬁlling out
space (whilst still possibly having zero measure).
   Suppose there exists a Kakeya set K ⊆ Rn which not only has measure zero,
but is lower dimensional; say the Minkowski dimension of K is less than n. This
pathological object would pack all the line segments into a truly tiny space. We
could then apply Feﬀerman’s argument to this Kakeya set. The pile up eﬀect for
our new K would be monstrous: far worse than the Perron tree construction. In
particular, it would overwhelm the eﬀect of smoothing, at least for small values of
α > 0, and give a counterexample to the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture.

                                5. Dimensions of Kakeya sets
5.1. The Kakeya Conjecture. The existence of low dimensional Kakeya sets
would have profound consequences for harmonic analysis, providing counterexam-
ples to many important problems, including the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture dis-
cussed above. However, it seems very diﬃcult to construct a Kakeya set which is
signiﬁcantly smaller than that coming from the Perron tree construction. This led
to the widely held belief that low dimensional Kakeya sets do not exist.
Conjecture 5.1. Any Kakeya set K ⊆ Rn has dimension n.
   Here, as before, dimension refers either to the Minkowski or the Hausdorﬀ di-
mension. At its heart the meaning of the conjecture is simple: although Kakeya
sets can have measure zero, they cannot be too small.
   If the Kakeya Conjecture failed, then there would exist a Kakeya set in Rn of
small dimension (less than n). Following the discussion of the previous section, this
set could be used to produce a Feﬀerman-style counterexample to the Bochner–
Riesz Conjecture. In this way, we see that
(5.1)         Bochner–Riesz Conjecture                 =⇒          Kakeya Conjecture.
Many other central conjectures in Fourier analysis are known to imply the Kakeya
Conjecture, following a similar scheme. But the signiﬁcance of the Kakeya Conjec-
ture stretches far beyond Fourier analysis! There are important problems in PDE,
combinatorics and number theory which are also known to either imply the Kakeya
Conjecture or some variant.
   The Kakeya Conjecture in the plane is not too diﬃcult. In the 1970s, Davies
[7] and later Córdoba [6] gave two very diﬀerent proofs showing that any planar
Kakeya set has dimension 2.11 Correspondingly, the Bochner–Riesz Conjecture is
also known to be true in two dimensions, and in general we have a relatively good
understanding of Fourier analysis in the planar setting. By contrast, the Kakeya
Conjecture in three (and higher) dimensional space is much, much harder. The
additional directions in three dimensions complicate matters enormously. Corre-
spondingly, our understanding of many central questions in Fourier analysis in R3

     11 See, for instance, [25] and [17] for expositions of these results.
                                THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                        15


is severely lacking. The Kakeya Conjecture in higher dimensions has been a ma-
jor bottleneck in harmonic analysis over the last 50 years. For this reason, it is
considered one of the most important open problems in the area.
5.2. Spectacular progress. Many mathematicians have studied the Kakeya Con-
jecture in three (and also higher) dimensions over the last 50 years. By their ef-
forts, deep connections were discovered between the problem and questions in PDE,
arithmetic combinatorics, number theory, and beyond [14, 25]. Partial results on
the Kakeya Conjecture have led to dramatic breakthroughs on other problems.12
However, despite remarkable successes, a full solution, even for n = 3, always ap-
peared far out of reach. The Kakeya Conjecture achieved a certain notoriety and
became a byword for a diﬃcult, near impossible challenge. This was the state of
aﬀairs until February 2025, when Hong Wang and Joshua Zahl [22] announced the
ﬁnal piece of a spectacular full solution of the three dimensional problem!
Theorem 5.2 (Wang–Zahl [21, 22]). Any Kakeya set K ⊆ R3 has dimension 3.
   The monumental proof of Theorem 5.2 is hundreds of pages long and is spread
over multiple papers. It combines a rich array of ideas, and relies on contributions
from many diﬀerent mathematicians over the last 30 years. However, their argu-
ments also incorporate a wealth of new and deep insights and mark a major leap in
our understanding. The work of Wang and Zahl is a great and historic achievement
in modern mathematics.
5.3. Elements of the proof. We conclude with a discussion of some of the features
of the Wang–Zahl proof. Given the length and complexity of their arguments, we
only provide the roughest of sketches.
Discretisation. The ﬁrst step is a standard reformulation of the problem. Suppose
K ⊆ R3 is a Kakeya set and, for 0 < δ < 1, let Nδ K denote the δ-neighbourhood
of K. We may assume K has measure zero (since otherwise it automatically has
dimension 3). It then follows that
(5.2)                           |Nδ K| → 0        as δ → 0+ ,
where here the notation | · | is used to denote 3-dimensional volume.
   The Minkowski dimension quantiﬁes the rate of convergence in (5.2). In order
to prove our Kakeya set K has Minkowski dimension 3, given ε > 0, we need to
show that there exists some constant cε > 0 such that
(5.3)                         |Nδ K| ≥ cε δ ε      for all δ > 0.
In particular, although |Nδ K| → 0 as δ → 0+ , the rate of convergence is much
slower than any power of δ. In this sense, K is ‘large’. We remark that Hausdorﬀ
dimension provides a more nuanced notion of size, which relies on analysing K
simultaneously at many scales, rather than just one ﬁxed scale δ. For the purposes
of this sketch, however, we stick to the simpler notion of Minkowski dimension.
   When we form the δ-neighbourhood Nδ K of K, each line segment in K fattens
up into a solid shape which is roughly a cylinder of length 1 and radius δ. We call
these cylinders δ-tubes. We expect many of the δ-tubes formed from lines in K
   12 To highlight one particularly striking instance, the multilinear Kakeya theory of Bennett–

Carbery–Tao [1] led to the resolution of the longstanding main conjecture in Vinogradov’s mean
value theorem [4] in analytic number theory.
16                                     JONATHAN HICKMAN


to essentially coincide. For this reason, we sample from K a ﬁnite family of line
segments L with directions forming a maximal, δ-separated set. The corresponding
δ-tubes are then essentially distinct (they diﬀer signiﬁcantly from one another). To
succinctly describe this setup, we make the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 5.3. For 0 < δ < 1, we say that a set T of δ-tubes is direction-separated
if the directions of the core lines of the tubes in T form a δ-separated set.
     In light of the above, the proof of (5.3) reduces to showing the following.
Theorem 5.4 (Kakeya Conjecture, discretised version [21, 22]). Given any ε > 0,
there exists some cε > 0 such that for all 0 < δ < 1 the inequality
                                              
                                     
(5.4)                              T  ≥ cε δ ε   |T |
                                       T ∈T             T ∈T

holds whenever T is a direction-separated set of δ-tubes in R3 .
                                                                
   If the tubes in T were disjoint, then we would have  T ∈T T  = T ∈T |T |. Thus,
(5.4) can be interpreted as saying the tubes in T are ‘almost’ disjoint.
   To pass from (5.4) to (5.3), we simply take T to be the set of tubes formed
from
                                                          On the one hand, Nδ K ⊇
       the line segments belonging to L as deﬁned earlier. 
  T ∈T  T . On  the other hand,  maximality  ensures that    T ∈T |T | ∼ 1. These ob-
servations combine with (5.4) to give (5.3). The advantage of the reformulation in
Theorem 5.4 is that, rather than studying a continuum of line segments in K, here
we study a ﬁnite set of δ-tubes. This is a form of discretisation, a common tool in
Fourier analysis and geometric measure theory.13
Exploiting distinct directions. It is surprisingly diﬃcult to directly leverage the
direction-separated hypothesis from the Kakeya set deﬁnition. In practice, one
often works with weaker, and more malleable, conditions. We noted earlier that
direction-separated tubes are essentially distinct. This is formally deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 5.5. Let 0 < δ < 1 and T be a set of δ-tubes. We say the tubes in T
are essentially distinct if |T1 ∩ T2 | ≤ |T1 |/2 for all T1 , T2 ∈ T with T1 = T2 .
   It is natural to ask whether the conclusion of Theorem 5.4 continues to hold
under the weaker hypothesis that the tubes in T are essentially distinct. However,
there is an easy counterexample. Assume 0 < δ < 1 satisﬁes δ −1 ∈ N and let
          A := {(δj, 0, 0) : 1 ≤ j ≤ δ −1 } and B := {(δj, 1, 0) : 1 ≤ j ≤ δ −1 }
be sets of equally spaced points along a pair of parallel lines in S := [0, 1]2 × {0}.
Form a family L of δ −2 line segments by joining every point in A to a point in B. If
T denotes the corresponding set of δ-tubes, then #T = δ −2 and the tubes
                                                                        in T are
essentially distinct. However, T ⊆ Nδ S for all T ∈ T and, moreover, | T ∈T T | ∼ δ.
Thus, (5.4) fails in this case.
   In the above example, the δ-tubes concentrate in Nδ S, which is essentially a
1 × 1 × δ rectangular prism. What happens if we rule out this behaviour?
Deﬁnition 5.6 ([24]). A set T of δ-tubes in R3 satisﬁes the Wolﬀ axiom if
(5.5)                             #{T ∈ T : T ⊆ R} ≤ δ −2 |R|
holds whenever R ⊆ R3 is a rectangular prism.
     13 We also saw an instance of discretisation in the construction of the Feﬀerman counterexample.
                               THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                    17


   If T is direction-separated, then it is not diﬃcult to see that T automatically
satisﬁes the Wolﬀ axiom. It is natural to ask whether the Wolﬀ axiom is suﬃcient
to ensure the conclusion of Theorem 5.4. It turns out that this is indeed the case.
Theorem 5.7 (Strong Kakeya Conjecture [21–23]). Given any ε > 0, there exists
some cε > 0 such that for all 0 < δ < 1 the inequality
                                              
                                     
(5.6)                              T  ≥ cε δ ε   |T |
                                   T ∈T              T ∈T

holds whenever T is a collection of δ-tubes in R3 which satisfy the Wolﬀ axiom.
   At this point we encounter the ﬁrst major indication of the subtlety of the Kakeya
problem: Theorem 5.7 fails over the complex ﬁeld! In [15, §13], authors considered
the compact piece of the Heisenberg group in C3 , deﬁned by
           H := (z1 , z2 , z3 ) ∈ C3 : I(z1 ) = I(z2 z 3 ), |z1 |, |z2 |, |z3 | ≤ 2 .
It is easy to see that H contains a 4 (real) parameter family of complex line segments
                  a,b,w := {(z, w + az, zw + b) : z ∈ C, |z| ≤ 1/2},
where a, b ∈ R and w ∈ C with |a|, |b|, |w| ≤ 1. From this, one may construct a set
T of complex δ-tubes with #T ∼ δ −4 which satisﬁes the natural complex analogue
of theWolﬀ axiom. Since each complex δ-tube T has measure |T | ∼    δ 4 , it follows
                                                                                 
that T ∈T |T | ∼ 1. However, T ⊆ Nδ H for all T ∈ T and, morover,  T ∈T T  ∼ δ.
Thus, T fails (5.6).
   In light of the above example, any proof of Theorem 5.7 must somehow distin-
guish between the real and complex ﬁeld. The deﬁnition of the Heisenberg group
relies on the notion of the real and imaginary parts of a complex number, and the
accompanying conjugation operator z → z̄. These deﬁnitions in turn rest on the
existence of the half-dimensional subﬁeld R ⊆ C. There is no apparent analogue
of this structure in the real line. Indeed, a famous result of Edgar–Miller [8] shows
that any Borel subring of R either has Hausdorﬀ dimension 0 or is the whole of R.
This fact will play an important role later in the proof.
Reducing to a symmetric case. To prove Theorem 5.7, we can attempt to     isolate
conﬁgurations of tubes which are extremal, or optimal, in the sense that  T ∈T T 
is minimal over all sets of tubes T of a ﬁxed cardinality satisfying the Wolﬀ ax-
iom. If we can prove that the Strong Kakeya Conjecture holds for such extremal
conﬁgurations, it will automatically hold in all cases.
   It is natural to expect an optimal conﬁguration of tubes should saturate the
Wolﬀ axiom hypothesis of Theorem 5.7. Indeed, if there was any leeway in our
hypotheses, we could hope to exploit it to construct a tighter packing of tubes.
This leads to the deﬁnition of a sticky set of tubes.
Deﬁnition 5.8 (Sticky, informal). For each intermediate scale δ ≤ ρ ≤ 1, we
consider fattening the δ-tubes T into ρ-tubes Tρ . We expect many of the ρ-tubes
formed in this way to essentially coincide. We therefore extract a maximal family
of essentially distinct ρ-tubes Tρ . We say the collection of δ-tubes is sticky if
(5.7)      #{T ∈ T : T ⊆ Tρ } ∼ (ρ/δ)2            for all Tρ ∈ Tρ and all δ ≤ ρ ≤ 1.
In other words, each ρ-tube in Tρ contains the maximal number of δ-tubes permitted
by the Wolﬀ axiom condition (5.5).
18                              JONATHAN HICKMAN


   Sticky sets of tubes are highly symmetric from the perspective of metric dimen-
sion. The condition (5.7) relates the distribution of the tubes T at diﬀerent scales
δ ≤ ρ ≤ 1 and is an example of statistical self-similarity: while the set is not liter-
ally self-similar (in the sense of the middle third Cantor set, for example), certain
quantitative properties of the set are identical at many diﬀerent scales. Our ex-
perience and intuition suggest optimal conﬁgurations should be highly symmetric.
Moreover, the Kakeya Conjecture is both a quantitative and a multi-scale problem:
we are interested in the size, and not the exact shape, of Kakeya sets and we need to
prove results for all scales δ. The relevant notions of symmetry should reﬂect these
fundamental features. This inexorably leads to statistical self-similarity. Thus,
sticky sets of tubes arise as a natural and important special case in the study of
the Kakeya Conjecture.

Theorem 5.9 (Sticky reduction [22]). In order to prove Theorem 5.7, it suﬃces
to assume, in addition to the existing hypotheses, that T is sticky.

   This is the most signiﬁcant innovation in the work of Wang–Zahl. Loosely speak-
ing, Theorem 5.9 formalises our intuition that optimal conﬁgurations of tubes for
Theorem 5.7 correspond to the highly symmetric arrangements for which the Wolﬀ
axiom is saturated. However, making this intuition precise is monumentally chal-
lenging. Reduction to the sticky case was previously explored by Wolﬀ and Katz–
Laba–Tao [15] in the early 2000s, but with limited success. Since then very little
progress had been made on this problem. Indeed, prior to Wang–Zahl [22], there
was no hint of a viable mechanism for reducing to the sticky case; to the contrary,
evidence was mounting [16] that such a reduction was infeasible. The proof of
Theorem 5.9 forms the entirety of the 127 page preprint [22] and introduces very
important new ideas.
   It is unfortunately outside the modest scope of this article to delve into the proof
of Theorem 5.9. However, we mention that it relies on an intricate induction or
self-improving mechanism. For this reason, it is essential to work with the Wolﬀ
axiom formulation of the problem as in the Strong Kakeya Conjecture. Indeed, the
hypotheses must be suﬃciently general in order to close the inductive arguments.

Forbidden symmetries. It remains to prove the Strong Kakeya Conjecture under
the additional hypothesis that the set of tubes T is sticky. To treat this case,
Wang–Zahl [21, 23] were inspired by an approach originally proposed by Katz and
Tao, and shared with the public in 2014 in a talk and blogpost [20] by Tao. At
that time, Katz–Tao were unable to rigorously implement their proposal. Indeed,
the implementation in Wang–Zahl [21] involves substantial new ideas and the use
of mathematical tools and techniques which were unavailable back in 2014.
   Katz–Tao proposed a proof by contradiction. We assume there exists a sticky set
of tubes T which
              satisﬁes the hypotheses of the Strong Kakeya Conjecture, but for
which K := T ∈T T has very small volume. Moreover, we may assume the volume
of K is minimal over all such sets of tubes T of a ﬁxed cardinality.
   The stickiness hypothesis means that K is highly symmetric. Under the mini-
mal volume condition, the symmetries are further ampliﬁed. In particular, following
landmark ideas introduced by Katz–Laba–Tao [15], one can show the tubes in T
must have extremely rich structural properties. Katz–Tao [20] proposed using these
structural properties to encode highly symmetric algebraic structures inside the set
                                 THE KAKEYA CONJECTURE                                         19


K. This is in part motivated by the earlier observation that any proof of Theo-
rem 5.7 must distinguish between the real and complex ﬁeld (and, consequently, it
is natural to expect algebra to play a role at some level).
   One of the most symmetric objects in mathematics is a commutative ring: it
simultaneously admits two symmetry groups! By analysing the interplay between
the structure of the Kakeya set at two diﬀerent scales, Katz–Tao [20] sketched a
method for encoding a ring-like object R into K. More precisely, they proposed
encoding an approximate subring R of R into K. This is a set which is approxi-
mately closed under the addition and multiplication operations, in the sense that
sum set R + R := {x + y : x, y ∈ R} and product set R · R := {x · y : x, y ∈ R} have
size comparable to that of R. Furthermore, this approximate subring would have
Hausdorﬀ dimension 0 < dimH R < 1.
   At this point, the proof sketch is nearing its endgame. We have already men-
tioned that the Edgar–Miller theorem [8] rules out the existence of subrings of in-
termediate Hausdorﬀ dimension. This would give the desired contradiction, except
we are dealing with approximate subrings rather than bona ﬁde subrings. However,
there is a more quantitative version of the Edgar–Miller theorem called Bourgain’s
sum-product theorem [2, 3], which does apply in the approximate setting. Using
this, Katz–Tao hoped to obtain a contradiction and thereby conclude the proof of
the Strong Kakeya Conjecture in the sticky case.
   As mentioned earlier, the rigorous proof in [21] diﬀers signiﬁcantly from that
originally envisioned by Katz–Tao [20]. Most notably, the connection with approx-
imate subrings is far less direct. Rather than appeal to Bourgain’s sum-product
theorem [3], Wang–Zahl [21] invoke various recent results in projection theory, a
subﬁeld of geometric measure theory, to arrive at a contradiction. These tools ul-
timately do rely on Bourgain’s sum-product theorem [3] but, taken as a whole, the
scheme of the proof is far more complex than that sketched in [20].


                                        References
