In 1874, 28-year-old mathematician 
Georg Cantor published what seemed like   a modest technical paper about sets of numbers.
But it was a Trojan horse. Hidden inside was an   idea that would reshape mathematics: 
infinity comes in different sizes.  Cantor's ideas were earth-shattering. People 
didn't have the expectation that there would   be different sizes of infinity. And so it 
sort of opened up this whole new realm.  We now celebrate Cantor as a genius who 
just changed the shape of mathematics.  That is…. a kind of myth.
Newly uncovered letters between Cantor and   a colleague point to a more complicated reality: 
an origin story built on a secret, and a theft.  I couldn't believe my eyes. Those were 
the letters that I was looking for.  So, how did a single paper become one of 
the most important proofs in math – and   who was left out to get it published?
For thousands of years, mathematicians   treated infinity like a hall of 
mirrors: endless, but untouchable.  Infinity as a concept was a taboo. 
It was a philosophical question.   The only kind of infinity mathematicians 
would accept had a name: potential infinity.   A sequence of numbers could go on forever, 
but forever was a process, not a destination.  The numbers are infinite, yes, 
but they're only potentially   infinite. That means you can have 
more and more numbers – as many as   you want – but you will never have 
all of them as a completed totality.  By 1872, two German mathematicians, 
Richard Dedekind and Georg Cantor,   were beginning to push back against more than 
two thousand years of mathematical caution.  They were independently wrestling with the 
same idea: constructing the number line.  At the time, mathematicians assumed the number 
line was incomplete because it was full of gaps. Take the stretch between any two natural numbers. 
Zoom in, and you find infinitely many fractions.  But no matter how far you zoom, certain 
numbers never appear. There are real numbers,   like the square root of two, that no fraction 
is equivalent to. You can get closer and closer,   without ever precisely landing on it.
Dedekind wondered: what if you could   define a real number by the gap it 
fills? What if the gap is the number?  Using a method now called a “Dedekind cut,” he   showed how to construct a number line 
that contains every possible limit. Independently, Cantor also built a 
complete and continuous number line.  You have these two guys who are formalizing 
the mathematical concept of the real number   line. They were on the same wavelength.
Dedekind and Cantor’s work revealed   something unsettling: infinity wasn’t 
hiding at the far end of the number line.   It was there in every interval. For the 
first time, infinity was a real destination.  So they exchange papers. And 
then by chance, they meet.  In the summer of 1872, Cantor and Dedekind 
met while vacationing in a Swiss village.   Cantor and Dedekind would make very different 
impressions if we could see them on the screen.   Cantor– he was very emotional. He wants to 
show that he can be a renowned mathematician.  While Dedekind is quite the opposite – 
he was a quiet man. Modest and calm.   Dedekind was much older. He wasn’t a 
guy who was crazy to get recognition.  Despite their differences, Cantor and 
Dedekind  were united by what they dared   to do: follow the path that led to infinity.
In November 1873, Cantor wrote to Dedekind,   kicking off a lively mathematical correspondence.
These letters are quite famous. They belong to   the most well-known correspondences 
in mathematics in the 19th century.  This correspondence is key to understanding the 
origins of infinity. Cantor’s letters survived,   but Dedekind’s side of the exchange was known   only from notes he later wrote. The 
originals were thought to be lost.  We see these questions coming from Cantor and 
a real exchange of new ideas in mathematics.  “Allow me to put a question to you,” 
Cantor wrote to Dedekind. “It has a   certain theoretical interest for me, but I 
cannot answer it myself; perhaps you can.”  Cantor's question was about collections 
of mathematical objects called sets.  A set can be finite, like the numbers 
one through ten. Or it can be infinite,   like the natural numbers, which go on forever.  To compare the sizes of two sets, mathematicians 
try to pair them up like ballroom dancers,   where every element of one set corresponds 
with a unique element of the other.  To see this in action, let’s compare 
the even numbers to the natural numbers. At first glance, there seem 
to be half as many evens.  But pair them up, and every even number 
finds an exact match with a natural number.  Counterintuitive as it seems, 
the two sets are the same size.  Both are what mathematicians call “countable.”
So Cantor presents the problem,   what happens with the real numbers?
The real numbers include all fractions   as well as numbers like the square root of two.
In his letter to Dedekind, Cantor asked a simple   but radical question: Are the real 
numbers countable? In other words,   can they be placed in one-to-one 
correspondence with the natural numbers?  According to Dedekind’s notes, he wrote back 
that he didn’t know how to prove that, but   that he had proved something else. The algebraic 
numbers, or the numbers you get as solutions to   algebra problems, could be put in one-to-one 
correspondence with the natural numbers.  In other words, the algebraic 
numbers are countable.  To find out if the real numbers were 
countable, Dedekind suggested that   Cantor focus on just a small part of 
the number line: between zero and one.  What Dedekind more or less shows is that you 
don't really need to consider all the real   number line – only just a little interval, 
and if that is countable – if you can create   a list for that – then it's more than enough. 
If the real numbers were countable, then you could   create a complete list of them and match each 
one with a natural number, with none left over.  But Cantor showed this was impossible.
Cantor proved that for any countable   list of real numbers, we can produce 
a real number that's not on the list.   Cantor sent his proof to Dedekind, who, according 
to his notes, improved on it significantly.   Today, here's how we think about the argument: Assume that we already have a complete list 
of real numbers between zero and one. They   can be matched perfectly with the natural numbers. Look at the first digit of the first real number, 
the second digit of the second, and so on.  Now, let’s change each of those digits, 
and combine them to create a new number.  This new number can not be anywhere on the 
list. It differs from the first number in   the first decimal place, the second number 
in the second decimal place, and so on.   That means that real numbers cannot be 
put in a one-to-one correspondence with   the natural numbers. They’re uncountable.
The implication was extraordinary. If the   real numbers can’t be counted, 
but the natural numbers can be,   then one infinity is larger than the other. 
So there's at least these two infinities.   And that's quite profound.
The heavens have opened,   and we realize that    there's this vast new 
realm of mathematics to look into and investigate.  If infinity could be measured, then 
it had to be treated as a legitimate   mathematical object. Cantor knew that not 
everyone would be willing to accept that.   He knew it was revolutionary. He knew this can 
have really deep implications to mathematics.  It was simply not the kind of way ideas 
were presented in mathematics before.   There was a big obstacle in the way of publishing 
these ideas: Leopold Kronecker, a mathematical   gatekeeper who was on the editorial board of one 
of the most prestigious journals in the field.   Kronecker is wholly on the side of the 
finite. He wants to purify pure mathematics,   restricting everything to what you can 
construct on the basis of the natural numbers.  Just imagine you have a very important 
message you want to share with people   and you know you cannot tell anybody 
because it will just lead to hostility.   Cantor would have to find a way through the 
gates of the establishment. He began to build   a mathematical Trojan horse – a paper framed 
around the countability of the algebraic numbers.   First, he presented Dedekind’s proof, nearly 
word for word. It was the perfect decoy. Just below it, Cantor smuggled 
in his own argument – refined   with Dedekind’s help – showing that 
the real numbers cannot be counted. Together, the two results pointed to the radical 
conclusion: infinity comes in different sizes.  It is a very short paper. 
It's barely four pages long.   It's famous because it proves something 
about the set of real numbers. But the   title of the paper doesn't highlight that. It 
reads, “On a Property of Algebraic Numbers.”   I have no doubt Cantor would have 
preferred to write an article with a title,   “There are different sizes of infinity – 
look at this crazy shit!” But he couldn't.  Cantor’s paper was published in Kronecker’s 
journal – under Cantor’s name alone.   Over the next few decades, the ideas from Cantor’s 
paper took root in the mathematical establishment,   forming the basis of set theory 
– a framework that would become   the unifying language for all of mathematics. 
There's this famous quote: “No one shall cast us   from the paradise that Cantor has created for us.”
Today, much of modern mathematics is written   in the language of set theory. 
In set theory, you can contemplate   essentially any kind of mathematical structure 
whatsoever. The picture that emerges is this   incredibly tall tower of mathematical 
reality in which more and more sets   appear. What set theorists are doing is trying to 
understand the nature of this hierarchy of sets.  Today, Cantor is celebrated as the architect 
of set theory – and as a central figure in   the foundations of modern mathematics.
What we usually say about set theory   is that we owe everything to Cantor alone. 
It's easier to tell an interesting story with just   one single character who is the heroic figure.
Some suspected that Cantor’s ideas hadn’t   emerged in isolation. But the 
historical record was incomplete.  The letters that Dedekind sent to Cantor, 
which would include the proof, were lost.  We thought they were lost forever. 
To prove how much Dedekind had shaped   Cantor’s famous paper, the missing 
letters would have to be found.  In 2024, mathematician and journalist Demian Goos 
began searching for Dedekind’s letters to Cantor.  You find a hundred sources and 
you want to check everything.   The search led him to an archive at 
the University of Halle in Germany,   where Cantor had held an academic position.  
So I went there, and they handed over just   like a little binder with all of 
the letters. It was believable.  There was one dated November 30, 1873. 
Goos knew immediately what it was.  I was so excited because I knew this must 
have the proof that I was looking for.   It was Dedekind’s proof that would later appear 
in Cantor’s famous paper without attribution.  “The set of all algebraic 
numbers,” Dedekind wrote,   “can be put into a one-to-one correspondence 
with the domain of all natural numbers.”  It was just like a shock.
With Dedekind’s letter in hand,   Cantor’s reply – sent just before the paper 
was published – suddenly made more sense.  “Your remarks,” Cantor wrote, “which I value 
so highly, were of great assistance to me.”  Cantor stole his friend's result, 
and put that result on the title   of his paper, right? Nasty business. 
I don't see any way of really letting him go   without some kind of accusation of plagiarism.
The newfound letters offer a glimpse into   mathematics as a process shaped 
by people – their ambitions,   their collaborations, and their choices.
Math is a collective enterprise. One has   to be careful with the ethical sides of the 
profession of mathematician, just like it   happens more generally with any scientist.
Goos hopes the letters will reshape how   mathematicians tell the story of one 
of the field’s greatest discoveries.   A lot of people are still 
very emotionally invested   in this story about Cantor and set theory. 
There is a reason – a valid reason – why we   acknowledge Cantor. But I think it's also more 
interesting to then tell the complete story. 