[music] [music] >> DPMMS is is a fantastic research environment. I I think uh the the kind of number one thing it offers is is fantastic students and great postdocs as well. And there's absolutely no doubt that I wouldn't [music] have had anything like the success I I have had without access to these these fantastic early career researchers. They're a real inspiration to to work with and they surprise me every day with what they're capable of. So, that's really amazing. >> [music] [music] >> Hello and welcome to Voices of Mathematics, the podcast from the Mathematics Faculty at the University of Cambridge. I'm Mariana Freigberger. >> [music] >> And I'm Rachel Thomas and we're from the outreach and communications team here. >> [music] >> The person you just heard is Richard Samworth. He is Professor of Statistical Science and the Director of the Statistical Laboratory at the Department of Pure Maths and Mathematical Statistics here in Cambridge, also known as DPMMS. >> Yeah, and Richard is indeed a very successful statistician. For example, last year he won two important prizes in statistics within 24 hours. One One was the David Cox Medal for Statistics and the other the Guy Medal in Silver. >> Well, that was a successful day. >> [laughter] >> And this year another great honor has come his way. He is an invited speaker at the International Congress of Mathematicians, better known as the ICM in our lives, which will take place in Philadelphia in the United States of America in July. It's this incredibly important congress in mathematics where they give out some of the most important prizes in maths. Um one being the Fields Medal, which they give to four mathematicians under the age of 40. There's also an important prize that's called the Abacus Medal, which is for a similarly aged mathematician who makes a contribution to computer science and mathematics. There's another number of significant prizes given out at the meeting. And being invited to give a talk at the ICM means you've done some really important work because this congress brings together thousands of mathematicians from right across mathematics right around the world. Marian, you talked to Richard about this and in this podcast we'll find out what kind of work Richard is going to speak about in his ICM lecture and also how his field, statistics, is very theoretical and very applied at the same time. >> Yeah, and I started out by asking Richard what he is most looking forward to at the ICM. >> I'm actually quite intrigued to see what the differences are between a a big maths meeting and a big statistics conference. I've never been to a major maths conference before. Um so that's certainly one thing. I'm sure there'll be some cultural differences. Um but of course it's where the Fields Medals are are handed out. So it'll be really exciting to see who's going to be awarded those. Um Uh I probably won't know the people, but um I'm sure there'll be a great sense of excitement around the place. >> Mm. So what is the biggest prize in statistics then that is sort of comparable to a Fields Medal? >> Uh so that that's a COPSS Presidents' Award, which is um has the same age restrictions as the Fields Medal, but it's awarded once every year as opposed to four every four years. So there's a little bit less of an accident of birth effect. >> And um could you explain what kind of I mean, if you know already, what kind of aspect what aspect of your work you're going to be talking about? >> Uh so, the title of my talk is going to be non-parametric inference under shape constraints past, present, and future. So, this is a topic that's very much home turf for me. It's something I've worked on for over 15 years now. Um but I think the field's taken couple of really interesting directions in the last couple of years and I've been involved with some of this work. Um so, I'm looking forward to um talking about that and and getting people's feedback on the work. >> So, this non-parametric inference, what's that all about? >> All right. So, here's a standard example from statistics. Imagine you want to understand the distribution of heights of people in the country. So, that's how tall they all are. Now, it would be great if you could draw a curve which tells you for each possible value of person's height, what proportion of people are that tall. And that curve would then also give you the probability of a person picked at random having a height that sits in a particular little little interval, say between 1.65 m and 1.70 m. And that curve is called the density of the distribution your data came from. So, now I kind of know where you're going with that. There is this curve that's called the normal distribution or the Gaussian distribution, which is that really familiar bell shape curve, which is given by a mathematical formula, and as long as you have collected enough data, the normal distribution will approximate the distribution of heights for the example that you're talking about really well. >> Yeah, that's right. And it is that famous bell curve. And that's sort of the highest point of the bell where you would hold it if it was a real bell, like in the middle, that corresponds to the most common height. And then as the tail slope off to the side, to the left and to the right, um that that corresponds to larger and smaller heights that get less and less common as they get more extreme. If you assume that the distribution of heights gives you this bell-shaped curve, which is given by that particular mathematical formula, then all you need to do to find the best fit is estimate two parameters, the mean and the standard deviation. Uh, the mean defines the the highest point of the bell curve and the standard deviation defines its width. And when you do that, so you find the best fit, that's called parametric inference because what you're doing is estimating the values of parameters. Here's Richard again. >> Uh, so let's suppose that you're interested in estimating the the density of the uh, distribution which your data came from. Um, one approach to this in a traditional way would be to assume beforehand that the data come from some parametric family of distributions. For instance, a family of normal distributions or gamma distributions. >> the bell curve. >> And if you're willing to do that, then all you have to do is to estimate the mean and the standard deviation of the normal distribution and you're you're good to go. You're done. >> As Richard indicated, the normal distribution is just one family of curves, which is suitable for when you're looking at different things like people's heights. And that parameters those parameters you you hone in on the mean and the standard deviation, they set which member of that family of curves you use to describe your um, data. But when you're looking at different types of data, so instead of heights, for example, say you want to see how many social media posts arrive on your feed every minute, then instead you'd reach for a different family of curves. Yeah, that's right. And when I learned statistics as an undergraduate, I was quite mystified by all of this because I thought like how where do all these mathematically defined families of curves come from and how do I know which one to use for a given data set? and how can I even be sure that there is such a kind of predefined um mathematical formula for my data? Um now, that was a bit naive of me because in many cases there is a good theoretical reason for why a particular um family of curves or mathematical formula would fit, but it's not always the case. And non-parametric inference addresses this. Here's Richard. >> The trouble is that many data sets don't follow a normal distribution well, and so the idea of non-parametric inference is that you want to be much more flexible about the class of distributions that you you want to fit. So, a very simple example of a non-parametric density estimator would be a histogram. So, you you just uh divide your real line in into usually equals width bins, and you count how many observations fall into each bin. And there are more sophisticated versions of histograms that you can use, um but I'm particularly interested in uh versions of uh non-parametric density estimates that that impose a sort of qualitative shape constraint on the on the density. For instance, it might be a decreasing density, or something I'm particularly interested in is is where it's log-concave, so the the logarithm of the density is a concave function. And the reason I particularly like this area is because you kind of get the best of both worlds between the parametric and the non-parametric world. You have the the uh the convenience of of of working with a fully automatic estimator as if you were in the parametric world, but you have the flexibility of this infinite-dimensional class of functions as if you're in the non-parametric world. >> Right, so I get it. You're not restricting yourself to only reaching for one particular family of curves, but on the other hand, you're not allowing yourself to go completely wild either. >> Yeah, that's right. And you're constraining the shape of your distribution to be one of a very large class of possibilities. And the class of log-concave functions Richard mentions actually contains the normal or the Gaussian distribution as well as many other ones that are familiar to statisticians. >> [music] [music] >> And um so you said there have been a few developments in the last few years. Is it possible to explain them or are they too technical? Like >> I can have a go. >> Yeah, yeah, let's try. >> Uh well, um so originally much of the field worked on what uh you might call traditional um uh non-parametric estimation problems like density estimation that we talked about or or non-parametric regression. And I think in the last couple of years we've seen uh the field evolve so that shape constraint ideas are being applied in new contexts. So uh one context that I've been thinking about is doing linear regression. >> Right, linear regression. Come on, Rachel, tell us what that is. >> [laughter] >> Okay, so very loosely speaking, imagine you've got two variables you think uh probably related to each other, one depends on the other. So for example, ice cream sales and temperature. It makes sense to think that the higher the temperature is, the more ice cream is sold. That that makes sense to me. So in linear regression, you assume that the relationship between these two variables can be captured by a certain type of relatively simple mathematical description. So for example, say expected ice cream sales equals some number times the temperature plus some other number. You then estimate from the data what values the parameters, these some numbers in my in my mathematical description should take to get the best fit. Yeah, and the reason that this is called linear regression is that you assume that the relationship between the mean of the dependent variable, so that's the ice cream sales, and those parameters, that that relationship is linear. And that's a little technical, but we'll put some links into the show notes. >> Now, you can do this for more than one variable, too. For example, you could do linear regression to see how ice cream sales depend on temperature and on the amount of rain. But, the data is never going to fit your neat mathematical expression exactly. There will be errors, so there will be discrepancies. And if you want to take account of those errors, you need to think about how they are distributed, how large they're going to be. So, you're back to the problem of dealing with distributions. Often, it's assumed that the errors follow a normal, so also called a Gaussian distribution, which we've met before. Um but, let's go back to Richard. >> Uh one context that I've been thinking about is doing linear regression, um but where you don't want to assume that you have normal errors, normally distributed errors. So, then you can uh combine ideas of uh shape constraints together with um robust statistics and information theory uh [snorts] to provide a new and more efficient way of estimating in of doing linear regression. >> Mhm. And that's because you're you're applying that to the errors, so you're applying that you're no longer assuming a particular shape of the distribution of errors. >> Exactly that, yes. So, we we teach our students in their early statistics courses that the Gauss-Markov theorem protects them against departures from Gaussianity for the errors, because it says it's that the best linear unbiased estimator. But, what I've realized is that that restriction to linear unbiased estimators is a very strong one, and that if you allow yourself to consider other sorts of estimators, you can actually do quite a lot better. >> And how do you find these things out? I mean, so to what extent do you do you look at real data the whole time and to what extent is it purely theory? Um >> It depends on the project. Some of my uh projects are more motivated by specific data sets or application areas than others. Um in this case, I would say that linear regression is such a ubiquitous problem that I didn't need a particular data set to to think I know that uh it is linear regression an important problem or are errors always normally distributed for for linear regression? I know they're not. So, I um this project was not so particularly motivated by one particular data set. Um some of my other work may be more closely so. >> And what kind of data sets have been very interesting for you like where you went like, "Oh, this is something new or there's something in there that hasn't been covered by by theory?" >> Uh well, an applied data set I I was working on recently uh was about the career intentions of UK medical students um and realizing that uh over the last decade there's been some very significant changes um that many UK medical students are no longer intending to go into UK specialties. Um many are going to Australia and New Zealand, but even leaving the medical profession uh afterwards. So, this um has pretty strong implications for for uh education and and and for policy. Yeah. >> Okay. So, that's interesting. So, on the one hand, sometimes you do like pure theory where you where it is yeah, just theory and and sometimes you literally look at data and you analyze it and you come up with conclusions that are have a direct impact on everyone. So, you're doing both all the time. >> do both. >> Okay, interesting. >> should say that most of my work is is is methodol- methodology and theory. >> [music] [music] >> It's not surprising that Richard does so much theoretical work. It would be hard to find anyone in DPM's Department of Pure Maths and Mathematical Statistics who doesn't really. But I know there is a very practical component of the Stats Lab and that is the Statistics Clinic. >> Yeah, and that's a very interesting thing. It's open to anyone with a statistics related element. Here's Richard. >> But but on then on the other hand I've I've run for more than 15 years now the Statistics Clinic. So this is where once a fortnight anyone in the university can come and get help with their statistical problems. And so that's exposed me to um applied problems from really a huge range of application domains. >> So apart from that one about medical uh students' intentions, what other kind of applications and questions do people come with you to you with in the um Statistics Clinic? >> A a a huge range and and um there there are there's very few questions that you really say are standard e- e- even though many people come along saying, "I'm sure this must be very easy to to you." or something like that. But really you you you have to think from first principles a lot and and uh I think it was David Cox who said there there's no such thing as routine statistical questions, only questionable statistical >> Yeah, yeah, good quote, Ben. So you get people from all departments coming. I think when I interviewed you before once you said about people coming from musicology and things like that. So >> Um I mean probably the majority of people uh are from the science side and and maybe particularly the life sciences. Um But it has been very striking to me that the range of subject disciplines that that come to the statistics clinic. >> Mhm. Yeah, that's amazing. So, then do you do you personally go and solve their problems or is it something that like the post docs do and the the PhD students? >> go away. We do we do we try and help them there and then. So, typical consultation lasts 45 minutes. Um and usually we're not going to end up on authors of as authors of the paper that that they're working on. Maybe we're getting acknowledgement or something like that. Occasionally um the the consultations turn into um collaborations and then of course we'll be working on the problem outside the the clinic times. >> Mhm. Cool. And is that something that involves like younger people, early career researchers, so they get that exposure to working on people's problems? >> Exactly. It's something I really encourage my group members and other people in the stats side that I get involved with because I think it's uh it's really important and good way of training you in applied statistics. Um I think actually for instance it teaches really good communication skills. One of the things that I um have learned from this process that I didn't didn't necessarily know when I started out was the way that you need to tailor um methods that you would recommend to the statistical expertise of who you're speaking to. It it's not realistic to to imagine that everyone's going to be able to absorb the the um all the nuances of what might be going on. So, um that that's one of the challenges. >> Aha, that's one of our favorite things to tell people when they're communicating, know your audience. Um so, as members of the comms team in the faculty of mathematics and as editors of plus.maths.org we also teach communications training courses to researchers and as I said that's the most important rule in any form of communication, know your audience. You need to understand your audience for any form of communication to be effective. But anyway, you have an interesting example of a problem that has been brought to the stats clinic, hasn't haven't you? >> Yeah, um this is something that Richard told me about a few years ago where people from the Department of Music came to the stats clinic. And the background is that well, basically a piece of music can be regarded as a sequence of data points. Um So, you know, data points is exactly what statistic deals with. And the problem that musicologists from the University of Cambridge brought to the statistics clinic involved finding patterns within a piece of music that would reveal the composer who had written it. So, that is an advantage of being in, you know, a big university that way you can make use of other departments that have expertise that you don't have. There's an interchange. But I went on to ask Richard about what it's like working in DPMs in particular. >> So, you're a member of DPMs, the Department of Pure Mathematics and Mathematical Statistics. Um to what extent has being in that department like what are the key factors that have sort of supported you and contributed to you being such a successful statistician like you're going to the ICM as invited speaker and you've won lots of prizes. >> Uh well, thank you. And DPMs is is a fantastic research environment. I I think uh the the kind of number one thing it offers is is fantastic students. And and and and great postdocs as well. And um there's absolutely no doubt that um I wouldn't have had anything like the success I I have had without um access to these these fantastic early career researchers. They are real inspiration to to work with and they they surprise me every day with what they're capable of. So, that's really amazing. The building is is is lovely place to work in. I like the fact that all of maths is is on the same site and and sort of everyone's nearby like that. I think it's a little bit unfortunate that we're for instance so far away from the biostatistics unit on the on the medical sciences campus. Um but you can't have everything right right on your doorstep. Um it it's a lovely place to work. Um colleagues, the support staff um I I I find them a a very um congenial um group of people to to to work with. >> [music] >> That brings us to the end of our interview with Richard Samworth. Rachel, you and I are going to be at the ICM in Philadelphia and we're very much looking forward to Richard's talk. >> We definitely are. We're definitely looking forward to hearing all of the speakers from um the maths faculty there and of course many of the others. Um so stay tuned for a podcast from the ICM. But if you enjoyed listening to this podcast, please consider recommending it to a friend or rate and review it wherever you're listening. It really helps other people find us. Thanks for listening and bye for now. >> [music]