Séminaire BOURBAKI                                                       Novembre 2025
78e année, 2025–2026, n° 1244


                          MINIMAL SURFACES
           VIA EQUIVARIANT EIGENVALUE OPTIMIZATION
              [after Karpukhin, Kusner, McGrath, and Stern]

                                    by Giada Franz




Introduction

   Spectral geometry concerns the interplay between the geometry of a manifold and
suitable eigenvalue problems defined on it. One classical renowned example is the
Faber–Krahn inequality (Faber, 1923; Krahn, 1925), which states that the first Dirichlet
eigenvalue of the Laplace operator on Euclidean domains with fixed area is minimized
by a round disk. In other words, of all drums with the same area, the round one has
the lowest pitch.
   Here, we are interested in other classical shape optimization problems that have
surprising connections with the theory of minimal surfaces. In particular, we examine
the groundbreaking work of Karpukhin, Kusner, McGrath, and Stern (2024), who exploit
this connection to construct many new examples of minimal surfaces in the sphere and
free boundary minimal surfaces in the ball. Minimal surfaces are critical points of the
area functional, one of the oldest and most classical objects in differential geometry,
and they play a central role in current research. Beyond their relevance in physical
applications, they are beautiful and rich mathematical objects, exhibiting both a great
diversity of examples and strong rigidity properties.
   We will now briefly introduce the objects and results we are going to discuss, before
delving into the details in the next sections.

Laplace eigenvalue optimization and minimal surfaces in spheres
   The first problem discussed in this exposé regards the optimization of the eigenvalues
of the Laplace operator on a Riemannian surface with fixed area. Hersch (1970) proved
that among all Riemannian two-spheres with fixed area, the first eigenvalue of the
Laplacian is maximized by the round sphere. It is then natural to pose the same question
when the Riemannian surface has more complicated topology. Surprisingly, Nadirashvili
(1996) discovered that, if a Riemannian surface maximizes the first eigenvalue of the
Laplacian among all Riemannian surfaces with the same topology and the same area,
then it can be isometrically immersed as a minimal surface in the unit sphere Sn ⊂ Rn+1
for some n ≥ 3. We recall that basic examples of minimal surfaces in S3 are the equatorial
                                        1244–02


two-sphere (whose metric indeed coincides with the round metric in Hersch’s result)
and the Clifford torus (see Example 1.1).
  This connection between Laplacian eigenvalue optimization and minimal surfaces
in round spheres spurred advances in the study of shape optimization, as well as in
the study of minimal surfaces in spheres. The work of Karpukhin, Kusner, McGrath,
and Stern (KKMS, from now on) is a striking example of this. Indeed, the authors
use equivariant Laplace eigenvalue optimization to construct many new examples of
embedded minimal surfaces in S3 . This is the first time that eigenvalue optimization
has been successfully employed to systematically construct new families of embedded
minimal surfaces in a three-dimensional manifold.
Theorem A (KKMS, Theorem 1.1). — For every γ ∈ N, there exist at least ⌊ γ−1 4
                                                                               ⌋+1
                                                         3
nonisometric, embedded, orientable, minimal surfaces in S with genus γ and area less
than 8π.




       Figure 1. Numerical simulations from Schulz (2025) of two minimal surfaces
       obtained in Theorem A, with genus 7 and 11 respectively. Both surfaces are
       represented after stereographic projection of S3 into R3 . The right image
       represents only half of the surface.

   Note that, prior to this result, Ketover (2022) proved that the number of embedded
minimal surfaces in S3 with genus γ goes to infinity as γ → ∞ (with rate at least
γ/ log log γ). All the surfaces constructed in (Ketover, 2022) have area less than 4π 2
and they are constructed via Simon–Smith min-max theory. It is an interesting open
question to understand the asymptotic number of nonisometric minimal surfaces as
the genus γ goes to infinity. However, though expected, so far we do not even know
if there are finitely many nonisometric minimal surfaces for every given genus. Only
compactness, in the smooth topology, of the space of embedded minimal surfaces in S3
with fixed genus is known by a result of Choi and Schoen (1985).
   Theorem A is proven by finding a Riemannian surface M maximizing the first Laplace
eigenvalue among all Riemannian metrics on M which are symmetric with respect to
a reflection τ such that M/⟨τ ⟩, the quotient of M by the two-element group generated
by τ , has genus zero. By work of Nadirashvili (1996), the surface M can be isometrically
                                         1244–03


immersed as a minimal surface in a sphere Sn . However, in general, the immersion is
not an embedding, and the target sphere cannot be expected to have low dimension.
One of the core ideas of KKMS, which we will see in detail in Section 4, is that imposing
the symmetry with respect to the reflection τ ensures that the immersion is actually an
embedding in S3 with area control, as stated in the theorem.
   Besides the reflection τ , it is possible to further assume symmetry with respect to
any larger discrete group Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × G acting on M and generated by reflections. By
choosing different groups Γ and different actions on a surface with fixed genus γ, it is
possible to prove the existence of many nonisometric examples as stated in the theorem.
Indeed, the number ⌊ γ−1 4
                            ⌋ + 1 in Theorem A is obtained by performing equivariant
eigenvalue optimization with respect to different actions of the group Γ = Z2 × Z2 . The
number is not optimized and can be improved by taking different groups Γ.
   Theorem A fits into a long history of existence results for minimal surfaces in S3 , be-
ginning with the result of Lawson (1970), who proved the existence of embedded minimal
surfaces in S3 with arbitrary prescribed genus. Active research on existence questions has
continued ever since (see e.g. Karcher, Pinkall, and Sterling, 1988; Kapouleas and Yang,
2010; Ketover, 2022; Kapouleas and McGrath, 2023). Observe that proving existence
of minimal surfaces is in general hard, as these objects display instability and rigidity
properties, as witnessed for example by uniqueness results for low topologies (see e.g.
Brendle, 2013a; Marques and Neves, 2014; and related Bourbaki seminars by Carron,
2016; Rivière, 2015) or with suitable symmetries (see Choe and Soret, 2009; Kapouleas
and Wiygul, 2020, 2022 for properties of the Lawson surfaces, including uniqueness
results). Despite these advances, many fundamental questions concerning the number
and uniqueness of minimal surfaces remain open (see e.g. KKMS, Section 1.6, for open
questions related to Theorem A).

Remark 0.1. — All the closed (i.e., compact without boundary) surfaces obtained in
KKMS are doublings of an equatorial sphere S2 ⊂ S3 . Heuristically, this means that
they resemble two copies of an equatorial sphere attached by some necks (cf. Figure 1).
We refer to (Kapouleas and McGrath, 2023, Definition 1.1) for a precise definition.
  Since their introduction by Kapouleas and Yang (2010), doublings of the sphere and
more generally of any minimal surface have been extensively studied. We mention for
example recent papers via gluing methods by Kapouleas and McGrath (2024) and Chu
and Stern (2025). So far, all the known examples of embedded minimal surfaces with
area less than 8π are the equatorial sphere itself or a doubling of it. It is an interesting
open question to understand if this is always the case or whether there are examples of
embedded minimal surfaces in S3 with area less than 8π which are not a doubling of
the equatorial sphere (see e.g. Kapouleas and McGrath, 2019).

Remark 0.2. — The closed minimal surfaces constructed in KKMS have area less
than 8π, and the area converges to 8π as the genus goes to infinity. This asymp-
totic behavior has been studied by Karpukhin, McGrath, and Stern (2025), who prove
                                        1244–04


that the convergence is exponential in the genus γ for most of the surfaces and, in
general, at least as fast as the area growth for the Lawson surfaces ξγ,1 , which are
conjectured to have the least area among minimal surfaces with genus γ (cf. Kusner,
1989, p. 343).

Steklov eigenvalue optimization and free boundary minimal surfaces in balls
   Minimal surfaces in spheres have a natural counterpart in Euclidean unit balls Bn
in Rn , namely free boundary minimal surfaces. As the name suggests, these objects are
surfaces with boundary and they are critical points of the area functional with respect
to variations that constrain the boundary of the surface to the boundary ∂Bn of the ball.
Two examples are the equatorial disk and the critical catenoid in B3 (see Example 2.1).
   One might hope that there is a connection with an eigenvalue problem on surfaces with
boundary, in analogy with the closed case. It turns out that this is indeed the case and
the right eigenvalue problem is the Steklov problem (or Dirichlet-to-Neumann problem),
thanks to work of Fraser and Schoen (2011, 2013, 2016). After Fraser–Schoen’s results,
the study of free boundary minimal surfaces in B3 has seen a lot of activity over the
last 10 years, with many existence results (see e.g. Folha, Pacard, and Zolotareva, 2017;
Kapouleas and Li, 2021; Fernández, Hauswirth, and Mira, 2023; Franz and Schulz,
2023) and works on the properties of these objects (see e.g. Kusner and McGrath, 2024).
However, the analogue of Lawson’s problem, posed by Fraser and Li (2014, Question 1;
see also the survey by Li, 2020, Open Question 1), about the existence of free boundary
minimal surfaces in B3 of every topological type, was still open until Karpukhin, Kusner,
McGrath, and Stern (2024) affirmatively answered this question.
Theorem B (KKMS, Theorem 1.2). — For every γ, β ∈ N, β ≥ 1, there exist at least
⌊ γ−2
   4
      ⌋ + 1 nonisometric, embedded, orientable, free boundary minimal surfaces in B3
with genus γ and β boundary components. Moreover, these embeddings have area less
than 2π and are doublings of an equatorial disk B2 ⊂ B3 .




       Figure 2. Simulations from Schulz (2025) of two free boundary minimal
       surfaces obtained in Theorem B. The left one has genus one and two boundary
       components, while the right one has genus two and two boundary components.
                                         1244–05


   The surfaces in the previous theorem are obtained as embeddings by first eigenfunc-
tions (i.e., the coordinate functions are first eigenfunctions) of the Steklov operator on a
compact orientable surface M with genus γ and β boundary components, with respect
to a metric maximizing the first Steklov eigenvalue with fixed area, among metrics
symmetric with respect to a suitable action of the group Γ = Z2 × Z2 . As in the closed
case, many different groups and many different actions can be considered, even if, for
technical reasons, the possibilities are not as general as in the closed case (see KKMS,
Theorem 9.15 and Remark 6.2 below). Similarly to the closed case, many questions
remain open, concerning for example the existence, uniqueness and number of examples
for each topology.

Existence of a maximizing metric
   As mentioned above, the proofs of Theorems A and B are based on proving the
existence of a metric maximizing the first Laplace eigenvalue (in the closed case) or
Steklov eigenvalue (in the case with boundary) among metrics with suitable symmetries
and fixed area. Then, one shows that the associated first eigenfunctions give a (free
boundary) minimal embedding in S3 (resp. B3 ). One of the novelties of the paper
KKMS is a new technique for proving the existence of such a maximizer. This problem
is extremely delicate, whether one assumes symmetry or not, and has seen many partial
results and attempts (see KKMS, Section 1.3 for a more detailed discussion). We will
explain the new method introduced in KKMS in more detail in Sections 6. Besides
proving the existence of a maximizing metric under suitable symmetry assumptions,
this new technique has already led to important advances in the existence of maximizing
metrics for the eigenvalues of the Laplacian.
Theorem C (Petrides, 2024, Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern, 2025)
    Every closed surface M admits a metric (smooth away from finitely many conical
singularities) maximizing the first Laplace eigenvalue among metrics with fixed area.
   The result was first proved by Petrides (2024) for M orientable and then extended
to the nonorientable case by Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern (2025), who also provide a
different proof for the orientable case. We refer to Section 6.3 for more details.
   Note that the analogous question for the first Steklov eigenvalue on general surfaces
with boundary is still open. However, we know that a maximizer exists for some
topologies of M with boundary (e.g. for all surfaces with genus zero and one, thanks to
KKMS, Corollary 1.11), and it is expected that the methods developed by Karpukhin,
Kusner, McGrath, and Stern (KKMS), Petrides (2024) and Karpukhin, Petrides, and
Stern (2025) will help in this direction.

Plan of the article
  The goal of this exposé is to give an introduction to the study of (free boundary)
minimal surfaces via eigenvalue optimization and present the main ideas in the proofs of
KKMS, after developing the most significant ingredients. We introduce both the closed
                                           1244–06


case and the case with boundary, but we will mainly focus on the closed orientable case
for what concerns the proofs, in order to simplify the exposition, while still presenting
the key ideas. Below is an outline of the content of the article.

                                                                            Preliminaries
  1. The closed setting
  – Minimal surfaces in the sphere.
  – Laplace eigenvalue problem on closed surfaces.

  2. The setting with boundary
  – Free boundary minimal surfaces in the ball.
  – Steklov eigenvalue problem on surfaces with boundary.

  3. Li–Yau conformal volume
  A milestone in spectral geometry, the paper by Li and Yau (1982) serves to prove some
  results in Section 4 and as a motivation for Section 5.

                                                                       Results of KKMS
  4. Eigenvalue optimization on basic reflection surfaces
  – Problem of maximizing the first eigenvalue on surfaces with suitable symmetries.
  – Proof in KKMS that if a maximizing metric exists, then Theorem A follows.

  5. Existence of a conformal eigenvalue maximizer
  Proof of the existence of a maximizing metric in each conformal class via min-max char-
  acterization of conformal eigenvalues by Karpukhin and Stern (2024c).

  6. Existence of an eigenvalue maximizer
  Proof of the existence of a maximizing metric of the first eigenvalue on surfaces with
  symmetries considered in Section 4, with new technique introduced in KKMS.




1. The closed setting

1.1. Minimal surfaces in spheres
   Let (M, g) be a closed Riemannian surface and let u : (M, g) → Sn ⊂ Rn+1 be a
smooth isometric(1) immersion in the sphere Sn . We say that the immersion is minimal
if it is a critical point of the area functional. Namely, for every one-parameter family of
immersions ut : M → Sn for t ∈ (−ε, ε) such that u0 = u, we have
                                   d
                                          area(ut (M )) = 0.
                                   dt t=0

  By isometric immersion, we mean that g = u∗ gSn = u∗ gRn+1 , in other words, the metric g is
(1)

induced by the Euclidean metric on Rn+1 via the map u. In this case, we denote by area(u(M )) =
area(M, u∗ gSn ) = area(M, g) the area of M with respect to the metric g.
                                            1244–07


By computing the first variation of area, it turns out that an immersion is minimal if
and only if its mean curvature is equal to zero. We refer to (Colding and Minicozzi,
2011; White, 2016) for classical references in the study of minimal surfaces.

Example 1.1. — The equatorial sphere S2 ⊂ S3 is a minimal surface. Another classical
example of minimal surface in S3 is the Clifford torus, given by
                         (                                                      )
      1       1               1
      √ S1 × √ S1 =          √ (cos θ, sin θ, cos φ, sin φ) ∈ R4 : θ, φ ∈ [0, 2π) ⊂ S3 .
       2       2               2
  By results of Almgren (1966) and Brendle (2013a), these are the only embedded
minimal surfaces (up to ambient isometry) in S3 of genus zero and one respectively.
However, note that there are infinitely many nonisometric immersed minimal tori in S3
by a result of Lawson (1969). We refer also to the survey (Brendle, 2013b).




       Figure 3. Image of the equatorial sphere S2 ⊂ S3 and the Clifford torus
       √1 S1 × √1 S1 ⊂ S3 after stereographic projection of S3 into R3 .
         2       2



Remark 1.2. — In the study of minimal surfaces, including some of the results discussed
in this paper, minimal immersions with branch points may appear. A map u : M → Rn+1
is said to be a branched immersion if it is an immersion away from finitely many points,
called branch points, where the map locally behaves like the complex map C ∋ z 7→ z k
for some k > 1. We refer to (Gulliver, Osserman, and Royden, 1973, Definition 1.2)
for a precise definition. See also (Colding and Minicozzi, 2011, Chapter 4, §4) for a
discussion of branch points in the context of minimal surfaces. If u : (M, g) → Rn+1 is
an isometry, then g is smooth away(2) from finitely many conical singularities at the
branch points, namely it degenerates to zero there.
   In this exposé, we do not insist on branch points and conical singularities (also because
they do not appear in the main theorems A and B). The reader not interested in the
technical details can ignore these elements.

   It was first observed by Takahashi (1966, Theorem 3) that an isometric immersion
u : (M, g) → Sn ⊂ Rn+1 is minimal if and only if the coordinate functions uj = xj ◦ u

(2)
  Note that, even if the expression “smooth away from” is used, the metric g is actually smooth
everywhere, but degenerates to zero at the conical singularities.
                                                  1244–08


for j = 1, . . . , n + 1 are eigenfunctions of the Laplacian ∆g with eigenvalue 2. Indeed,
for every isometric immersion u : (M, g) → Sn ⊂ Rn+1 , we have
                                                                 n+1                     n
(1)        −∆g uj = −∆g (⟨x, ej ⟩ ◦ u) = −⟨H M ⊂R                      , ej ⟩ = −⟨H M ⊂S , ej ⟩ + 2uj ,
                                                                                      n+1                 n
where {ej }n+1
           j=1 is the canonical basis of R
                                              n+1
                                                  , and where H M ⊂R and H M ⊂S are the
mean curvatures of M as a submanifold of Rn+1 and Sn , respectively. Therefore, the
                                           n
immersion u is minimal, namely H M ⊂S = 0, if and only if uj is a Laplace eigenfunction
with eigenvalue 2 for every i = 1, . . . , n + 1.

Remark 1.3. — In 1982, Yau conjectured that 2 is the first eigenvalue of the Laplacian
for every embedded minimal surface in S3 . This question is still open.

Remark 1.4. — If we do not require the immersion u : (M, g) → Sn to be an isometry,
we have that u is immersed by eigenfunctions (with respect to the same eigenvalue) of
the Laplacian ∆g if and only if it is harmonic (and not necessarily minimal). We recall
that a map u : (M, g) → Sn is harmonic if it is a critical point of the Dirichlet energy
                                                       
                                                   1
(2)                                        E(u) :=             |du|2g dvg ,
                                                   2       M

where dvg is the volume form on (M, g). When M has dimension two, the Dirichlet
energy is a conformal invariant, namely it does not change if computed with respect to
any other metric in the conformal class(3) [g] of g.
  Let us now show that u is harmonic if and only if it is immersed by λ-eigenfunctions of
the Laplacian (possibly(4) with respect to a metric conformal to g). If u : (M, g) → Sn is
immersed by eigenfunctions with eigenvalue λ, then −∆g ui = λui for all i = 1, . . . , n + 1.
Multiplying the equation by ui and summing over i = 1, . . . , n + 1, we then get
                     n+1             n+1                   n+1
                                                           X      1
                                                                                         
                           u2i = −                                   ∆g (u2i ) − |dui |2g = |du|2g .
                     X               X
              λ=λ                          ui ∆ g ui = −
                     i=1             i=1                   i=1     2

This implies that −∆g u = |du|2g u, and this equation precisely says that u is harmonic
(see Struwe, 2008, Section 6).
   Conversely, if u : (M, g) → Sn is harmonic, then −∆g u = |du|2g u. Therefore, by
taking gu = 12 |du|2g g, we have −∆gu u = 2u, in other words, the components of u are
eigenfunctions with eigenvalue 2 with respect to the metric gu .
   Note that in general the pull-back metric u∗ gSn may not belong to the conformal class
[g] of g, but when it does the immersion u is minimal. Indeed, we have that the map u
is minimal if and only if it is conformal and harmonic.

(3)
    Given a Riemannian surface (M, g), the conformal class of g is defined as the set of all metrics that
differ from g by a positive multiplicative function, i.e., [g] := {f g : f ∈ C ∞ (M ), f > 0}.
(4)
    Recall that being harmonic is a conformal invariant, while being immersed by eigenfunctions is not.
                                                   1244–09


1.2. Laplace eigenvalue problem on closed surfaces
  Let M be a smooth connected closed surface and let g be a smooth metric on M . Then,
the Laplace operator ∆g on M admits a discrete spectrum consisting of eigenvalues
0 = λ0 < λ1 ≤ λ2 ≤ · · · ≤ λk ≤ · · · → ∞. Namely, there exists an L2 (M )-orthonormal
basis {uk }k∈N of smooth functions such that
                                              −∆g uk = λk uk .
   We recall that the eigenvalues λk admit a variational characterization. In particular,
for the first eigenvalue λ1 we have(5)
                                                                            
                                               |du|2 dvg                         |du|2 dvg
(3)                λ1 =        inf          M           =       inf          M           .
                          u∈C∞ (M )\{0}
                                             M
                                                 u2 dvg      u∈Lip(M
                                                                    )\{0}
                                                                               M
                                                                                   u2 dvg
                              M u=0                              M u=0
                               
Note that the condition M u dvg = 0 is necessary to exclude the constant functions,
which are eigenfunctions with respect to eigenvalue λ0 = 0.
Remark 1.5. — Recall that, if u ∈ Lip(M ), that is to say u : M → R is Lipschitz contin-
uous, then uis differentiable almost everywhere by Rademacher’s theorem. Therefore,
the integral M |du|2 dvg is well-defined.
  We refer to (Chavel, 1984, Chapter 1, §5) for further background concerning the
spectral theory of the Laplacian on manifolds, including the following theorem. We
recall that the nodal set of an eigenfunction u is defined as its zero set u−1 (0) ⊂ M ,
denote by Nu , while its nodal domains are the connected components of M \ Nu .
Theorem 1.6 (Courant’s nodal domain theorem). — Let u = uk be the kth eigen-
function of the Laplacian ∆g on M . Then, its nodal set consists of a finite number of
C 2 -immersed circles that meet at a finite number of points, and the number of its nodal
domains is at most k + 1.
Remark 1.7. — A direct consequence of Courant’s nodal domain theorem is that a
first eigenfunction of the Laplacian has exactly two nodal domains. Indeed, it cannot
have one nodal domain (i.e., be nowhere zero) because it is orthogonal to the constant
functions, which are eigenfunctions with respect to eigenvalue λ0 = 0.
Remark 1.8. — A variant of Courant’s nodal domain theorem works also for Laplace
eigenvalues with Dirichlet or Neumann boundary conditions on a surface with boundary,
and for the Steklov eigenvalues considered in Section 2. A corollary of this (cf. Chavel,
1984, Corollary 2 in Chapter 1, §5) is that the first Dirichlet eigenvalue on a surface
with boundary is simple.(6)
(5)
    From now on, we omit the subscript g, i.e., write |du|2 = |du|2g , when it is clear with respect to which
metric the norm is computed.
(6)
    Note that the zero eigenvalue of the Laplacian on a connected closed surface is also simple (the
eigenfunctions are the constant functions). For the Dirichlet eigenvalue on a surface with boundary
the first eigenvalue is already positive and thus we start enumerating the eigenvalues from one.
                                            1244–10


  Since we consider the eigenvalue problem as the metric on M changes, we explicitly
write the dependence of the eigenvalues on the surface and the metric as λk (M, g).
Moreover, let us introduce a renormalized version of the eigenvalues as follows
                               λk (M, g) = λk (M, g) area(M, g).
Observe that λk (M, g) is scale invariant and is uniformly bounded from above on the
space of all metrics, by (Yang and Yau, 1980; Korevaar, 1993). Therefore, the maximum
of λk (M, g) over all smooth metrics on g, denote by
                                 Λk (M ) := sup λk (M, g),
                                             g smooth
                                              metric

is finite, and we can ask whether there exists a metric g0 maximizing the kth renormalized
eigenvalue over all metrics, that is to say λk (M, g0 ) = Λk (M ). Note that this is equivalent
to maximizing λk (M, g) among metrics of fixed area, as stated in the introduction.
Nadirashvili realized that if we find such a maximizing metric g0 then, surprisingly, we
get an associated minimal immersion into a sphere.

Theorem 1.9 (Nadirashvili, 1996, Theorems 1 and 5). — If g0 is a metric on M
maximizing the kth renormalized eigenvalue over all metrics, then there exist independent
kth eigenfunctions u1 , . . . , un+1 for some n ≥ 2 such that u := (u1 , . . . , un+1 ) : M → Rn+1
is a (branched) minimal immersion in Sn . Moreover, the map u can be made isometric
by rescaling g0 using a positive constant.

Remark 1.10. — In the previous theorem, we allow the metric g0 to have finitely many
conical singularities, which correspond to the branch points of u. This is because in
general we expect the maximizing metric to have this regularity (see Kokarev, 2014,
Regularity theorem). In fact, conical singularities arise for example for the maximizer
in case M has genus 2 (cf. Nayatani and Shoda, 2019, see also Example 1.16 below).
Note that the Laplace eigenvalues for metrics with conical singularities still make sense
(see e.g. Kokarev, 2014, Example 1.1).

Remark 1.11. — The theorem above holds more generally for metrics g0 that are critical
points of the renormalized eigenvalue λk (M, g), giving a correspondence between critical
points of renormalized eigenvalues and (branched) minimal immersions into spheres. We
stated it for maximizers only, because λk (M, g) is Lipschitz continuous with respect to
the metric g, in the smooth topology, but not differentiable in general. Therefore, one
needs a definition of critical points for the Lipschitz function λk (M, g). This is given in
(Nadirashvili, 1996, Section 3). The result also admits generalizations to manifolds M
of higher dimension (see El Soufi and Ilias, 2000; Karpukhin and Métras, 2022).

Remark 1.12. — For every n ≥ 2 for which Theorem 1.9 holds, we have that n + 1 is
no larger than the multiplicity of the eigenvalue λk (M, g0 ), but can be strictly smaller.
However, we know that n ≥ 3 unless M is a two-sphere.
                                                 1244–11


Idea of the proof of Theorem 1.9. — We refer to (Fraser and Schoen, 2013, Proposi-
tion 2.1) for a complete proof of the theorem, giving here only an idea of it. The result
follows from the first variation formula for λk (M, g) at a critical point. The delicate
point is that eigenvalues depend only Lipschitz continuously on the metric, therefore
we cannot just take classical derivatives.
   Let g0 be a metric maximizing λk (M, g). By rescaling the metric, without loss of
generality we can assume that λk (M, g0 ) = 2. It turns out that, for every symmetric
(0, 2)-tensor ω on M such that M ⟨ω, g0 ⟩ dvg0 = 0, there exists a kth eigenfunction u
with ∥u∥L2 (M,g0 ) = 1 and
                               
                                                  1
                Qω (u) := −          ⟨ω, du ⊗ du − |du|2 g0 + u2 g0 ⟩ dvg0 = 0.
                                   M              2
Note that ω represents the
                         
                           first derivative of a variation of g0 with fixed area (which is
assured by the condition M ⟨ω, g0 ⟩ dvg0 = 0).
Remark 1.13. — When the eigenvalue λk (M, g0 ) is simple, it is known that g 7→ λk (M, g)
is differentiable at g0 , and we can compute the derivative of λk in the direction ω,
obtaining Qω (u) (which is then equal to zero by criticality of g0 ). The previous one is
the general statement when λk (M, g0 ) is not simple (and not differentiable).
  Thanks to an application of the Hahn–Banach theorem, we then obtain that g0 belongs
to the convex hull (in the space of symmetric (0, 2)-tensor fields on (M, g0 )) of the set
                            1
                                                                      
                du ⊗ du − |du|2 g0 + u2 g0 : u is a kth eigenfunction .
                            2
In other words, there exist linearly independent kth eigenfunctions u1 , . . . , un+1 such
that
                               n+1
                                                   1
                               X                                            
(4)                    g0 =             duj ⊗ duj − |duj |2 g0 + u2j g0 .
                               j=1                 2
This easily implies that n+1 u2 = 1 (by tracing the equation) and, applying the Laplace
                        P
                             j=1    j
operator to this equation, we get
                      n+1                  n+1                    n+1
                             |duj |2 = −                                uj 2 = 2,
                      X                    X                      X
(5)                                              uj ∆g0 uj = λk
                       j=1                 j=1                    j=1

where we used that the uj ’s are kth eigenfunctions and λk = λk (M, g0 ) = 2. Together
with (4), this implies that n+1
                             j=1 duj ⊗ duj = g0 .
                           P

  In other words, the map u := (u1 , . . . , un+1 ) : M → Rn+1 takes values in Sn and it is
an isometric immersion. Moreover, each uj is an eigenfunction of ∆g0 with eigenvalue 2.
This implies that u is minimal by (Takahashi, 1966, Theorem 3), as discussed above.
   Recall that smooth closed surfaces are characterized by their topology, more precisely
by specifying their genus and whether they are orientable or not. The simplest case
is when M is topologically a two-dimensional sphere. This case was studied prior to
Nadirashvili’s result in seminal work of Hersch. Let us briefly present the result here.
                                                      1244–12


Proposition 1.14 (Hersch, 1970). — The round metric on S2 uniquely (up to rescal-
ing) maximizes the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue on S2 among all smooth metrics.
In particular, we get Λ1 (S2 ) = λ1 (S2 , gS2 ) = 8π.

Proof. — Let g be any metric on S2 . By the uniformization theorem, there exists a
conformal diffeomorphism f : (S2 , g) → (S2 , gS2 ). Up to composing with a conformal
transformation of the round sphere (S2 , gS2 ), we can assume that S2 f dvg = 0: this
follows from the explicit characterization of the conformal transformations
                                                               
                                                                                of S2 (see
Section 3), which gives the freedom(7) to choose the value of S2 f dvg . Therefore, by
the variational characterization (3) of λ1 applied to the components f1 , f2 , f3 of f , we
have that
                   3                                      3                          3 
            2                 2
                                               fj2 dvg ≤              |dfj |2g dvg =              |dxj |2gS2 dvgS2 = 8π,
                   X                                       X                           X
(6) λ1 (S , g) =         λ1 (S , g)
                   j=1                    S2               j=1   S2                    j=1   S2

where we used that the Dirichlet energy is conformally invariant.
   Now, let g be a metric for which equality holds. Up to a rescaling, we can assume
that λ1 (S2 , g) = 2. By equality in (6), the coordinates f1 , f2 , f3 are first Laplace
eigenfunctions on (M, g). Then, by applying the Laplace operator to the equation
P3     2                                        P3          2
  j=1 fj = 1 (similarly to (5)), we obtain that   j=1 |dfj |g = 2. Since f is a conformal
map, this implies that f is actually an isometry, concluding the proof.


Remark 1.15. — Let M be a genus zero surface with boundary and let λN       1 (M, g) be
the first Laplace eigenvalue on (M, g) with Neumann boundary conditions. Then, the
same proof as above shows that λN 1 (M, g)area(M, g) < 8π. Indeed, if M has genus zero,
there exists a conformal embedding f : (M, g) → (S2 , gS2 ) and then the proof proceeds
as above, using the variational characterization for the first Neumann eigenvalue:
                                                                        
                                                                            |du|2 dvg
(7)                               λN
                                   1 (M, g) =              inf           M           .
                                                    u∈C∞ (M )\{0}
                                                                           M
                                                                               u2 dvg
                                                        M u=0



Example 1.16. — The maximum of the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue is known
in the following cases. In most of these cases the maximizing metric is unique, meaning
that it is unique up to rescaling.
      – For the sphere, Λ1 (S2 ) = 8π and the unique maximizer is the round metric on S2 ,
        thanks to the previous proposition.
      – For the projective plane, Λ1 (RP2 ) = 12π and the unique maximizer is the Veronese
        surface, minimally embedded in S4 (see Li and Yau, 1982, Corollary 5).

  The idea of composing with a conformal transformation of a sphere Sn to prescribe a “center of
(7)

mass”, i.e., an integral quantity on the sphere, comes from (Szegö, 1954) and it is referred to as the
Hersch trick.
                                           1244–13

                                    √
  – For the torus, Λ1 (T2 ) = 8π 2 / 3 and the unique maximizer is the flat equilater
                                                                                   √ torus
    (i.e., the torus R2 /L, where L is the lattice generated by (1, 0) and (1/2, 3/2)),
    which can be isometrically minimally embedded in S5 by first eigenfunctions by
    (Nadirashvili, 1996, Theorem 1). By (El Soufi and Ilias, 2000, Theorem 2.1), the
    only other critical metric for λ1 on T2 is the flat square metric, which is the metric
                                                       3
    on the Clifford torus, minimally embedded   √ in S .         √
                                    2
  – For the Klein bottle, Λ1 (K ) = 12πE( 8/9), where E( 8/9) is the complete
    elliptic integral of the second kind evaluated at 8/9, by (El Soufi, Giacomini, and
    Jazar, 2006, Theorem 1.1). The unique maximizing metric is a metric of revolution,
    with which K2 can be isometrically minimally embedded in S4 .
  – For the orientable genus 2 surface, Λ1 (T2 #T2 ) = 16π and a maximizing metric is
    the metric on the Bolza surface, which is a branched double cover of the round S2 ,
    by (Nayatani and Shoda, 2019).



2. The setting with boundary

2.1. Free boundary minimal surfaces in balls
   Let (M, g) be a compact Riemannian surface with boundary and let u : (M, g) → Bn
be a smooth isometric immersion into the ball Bn ⊂ Rn such that u(∂M ) ⊂ ∂Bn .
Analogously to the closed case, we say that the immersion is free boundary minimal
if it is a critical point of the area functional; more precisely, if for every smooth one-
parameter family of immersions ut : M → Bn , with t ∈ (−ε, ε), such that ut (∂M ) ⊂ ∂Bn
and u0 = u, we have
                                    d
                                          area(ut (M )) = 0.
                                   dt t=0
Note that we allow the boundary of the immersion to move inside the boundary of
the ball, which is where the name “free boundary” comes from. Computing the first
variation of area, we get that being a free boundary minimal surface is equivalent to
having zero mean curvature and intersecting the boundary of Bn orthogonally.

Example 2.1. — The easiest examples of free boundary minimal surfaces in B3 are the
equatorial disk B2 ⊂ B3 and the critical catenoid, explicitly parametrized by
                                                                                
      [−aT, aT ] × [0, 2π] ∋ (t, θ) 7→ a cosh(a−1 t) cos θ, a cosh(a−1 t) sin θ, t ∈ B3 ,
where T > 0 is the unique positive solution of T tanh T = 1, and a = (T cosh T )−1 .
   The equatorial disk is the only free boundary minimal disk in B3 by a result of
Nitsche (1985) but we still do not know if the critical catenoid is the only embedded
free boundary minimal annulus in B3 . Note that there are infinitely many examples
of immersed free boundary minimal annuli in B3 by a result of Fernández, Hauswirth,
and Mira (2023). See also the construction by Kapouleas and McGrath (2022) with a
different method.
                                         1244–14




              Figure 4. The equatorial disk and the critical catenoid in B3 .


  In analogy with (Takahashi, 1966) in the closed case, Fraser and Schoen (2011,
Lemma 2.2) observed that an isometric immersion u : (M, g) → Bn is free boundary
minimal if and only if the coordinate functions uj = xj ◦ u for j = 1, . . . , n satisfy
                                  
                                  ∆ u
                                      g j = 0     on M
                                   ∂uj = u       on ∂M ,
                                    ∂η     j

where η is the unit outward conormal to ∂M . By definition, this equation means that
they are Steklov eigenfunctions with eigenvalue 1. We introduce the Steklov operator
in more detail in the next section.

2.2. Steklov eigenvalue problem on surfaces with boundary
 Let M be a smooth connected compact surface with boundary and let g be a smooth
metric on M . The Steklov operator is the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map given by
                                                ∂ û
                            u ∈ C ∞ (∂M ) 7→         ∈ C ∞ (∂M ),
                                                ∂η
where û ∈ C ∞ (M ) is the harmonic extension of u in the interior of M . The Steklov
operator admits a discrete spectrum consisting of eigenvalues 0 = σ0 < σ1 ≤ σ2 ≤ · · · ≤
σk ≤ · · · → ∞. Namely, there exist smooth functions {uk }k∈N ⊂ C ∞ (M ), which form
an orthonormal basis of L2 (∂M ), such that
                                 
                                 ∆ u
                                     g k = 0       on M
                                  ∂uk = σ u       on ∂M .
                                   ∂η      k k

We often write σk (M, g) to materialize the dependence of the Steklov eigenvalues on
the Riemannian manifold (M, g). We consider the renormalized Steklov eigenvalue

                          σ k (M, g) = σk (M, g) length(∂M, g),
                                             1244–15


which is invariant with respect to rescalings of the metric. Then, we define

                                  Σk (M ) := sup σ k (M, g),
                                               g smooth
                                                metric

and wonder whether there is metric g0 maximizing the kth renormalized Steklov eigen-
value σ k (M, g) over all metrics, that is to say σ k (M, g0 ) = Σk (M ).
  We refer to (Girouard and Polterovich, 2017; Colbois, Girouard, Gordon, and Sher,
2024) for surveys on the study of the Steklov operator. Here, we are interested in
the following connection between maximizing metrics for Steklov eigenvalues and free
boundary minimal surfaces, analogous to Theorem 1.9.

Theorem 2.2 (Fraser and Schoen, 2013, Proposition 2.4). — If g0 is a metric
on M maximizing the kth renormalized Steklov eigenvalue over all metrics, then
there exist independent kth eigenfunctions u1 , . . . , un for some n ≥ 2 such that
u := (u1 , . . . , un ) : M → Rn is a (branched) free boundary minimal immersion in Bn .
Moreover, up to rescaling g0 , the map u is an isometry when restricted to ∂M .

Example 2.3. — The maximal value Σ1 (M ) is known explicitly in the following cases:

      – On the disk B2 , we have Σ1 (B2 ) = π and the unique maximizer (up to σ-homothety,
        cf. Fraser and Schoen, 2016, Definition 2.1) is the flat disk by (Weinstock, 1954).
      – On the annulus, σ 1 is uniquely realized (up to σ-homothety) by the metric on the
        critical catenoid by (Fraser and Schoen, 2016, Theorem 1.3).
      – On the Möbius band, σ 1 is uniquely realized (up to σ-homothety) by the metric on
        the critical Möbius band, which is a free boundary minimal Möbius band embedded
        in B4 , by (Fraser and Schoen, 2016, Theorem 1.5).

Remark 2.4. — Besides the obvious analogy between the closed case and the case with
boundary, there is another very interesting connection between Theorems 1.9 and 2.2.
Fix an arbitrary γ ∈ N. Let M be the (differentiable) closed orientable surface with
genus γ, and, for every β ∈ N, let Mβ be the (differentiable) orientable surface with
genus γ and β boundary components. Then, Girouard and Lagacé (2021, Theorem 1.3)
and Karpukhin and Stern (2024c, Theorem 1.6) proved that limβ→∞ Σ1 (Mβ ) = Λ1 (M ).
Moreover, by (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024b, Theorem 1.1), if maximizing metrics on Mβ
and M exist,(8) then the associated free boundary minimal immersions Mβ → Bn+1
from Theorem 2.2 converge (in some suitable sense) to the minimal immersion M → Sn
from Theorem 1.9, as β → ∞.

(8)
  By Theorem C, we know that a maximizing metric for the first Laplace eigenvalue on closed surfaces
exists, but we do not currently know that a maximizing metric for the first Steklov eigenvalue exists
on all surfaces with boundary (see the discussion after Theorem C).
                                                          1244–16


3. Li–Yau conformal volume

   In this section, we recall the notion of conformal volume introduced by Li and Yau
(1982), both because it is useful to prove results related to the first Laplace eigenvalue
that will be important in what follows, and because it is one of the inspirations of the
min-max characterization of conformal eigenvalues by Karpukhin and Stern (2024c),
discussed in Section 5.
   Unless otherwise stated, let us assume that (M, g) is a closed(9) Riemannian surface.
If there exists a conformal immersion ϕ : M → Sn , then we define
                            Vc (n, ϕ) :=              sup        area(M, (h ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn ),
                                                   h∈Conf(Sn )

where Conf(Sn ) is the space of conformal automorphisms of Sn . Since h◦ϕ is a conformal
map, area(M, (h ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn ) is equal to the Dirichlet energy E(h ◦ ϕ) defined in (2) (see
e.g. White, 2016, Section 4); in other words
                                                                               
                                           ∗         1
(8)                area(M, (h ◦ ϕ) g ) = E(h ◦ ϕ) :=
                                                Sn                                  |d(h ◦ ϕ)|2 dvg .
                                                     2                          M

   Recall that the set of conformal automorphisms Conf(Sn ) of Sn has the structure of a
finite-dimensional Lie group, called Möbius group. Its quotient(10) modulo the isometry
group of Sn is homeomorphic to the open ball Bn+1 . In particular, we have that
                                               (                                                         )
           Conf(Sn )⧸                     1 − |a|2
(9)                        n ∼= G  (x) :=          (x + a) + a : a ∈ Bn+1 .
                     Isom(S )    a
                                          |x + a|2
Therefore, we can rewrite Vc (n, ϕ) as
(10)            Vc (n, ϕ) = sup            area(M, (Ga ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn ) = sup                    E(Ga ◦ ϕ).
                                a∈Bn+1                                             a∈Bn+1

Recall that the Dirichlet energy is invariant under conformal reparameterization of the
domain, as mentioned in Remark 1.4. Thus, Vc (n, ϕ) depends only on the conformal
class [g].

Lemma 3.1 (Li and Yau, 1982, Proposition 1). — If ϕ : (M, g) → Sn is an isometric
minimal immersion, then Vc (n, ϕ) = area(M, g).
                                       n
Proof. — Let H ϕ = H ϕ(M )⊂S be the mean curvature of the immersion ϕ, and let dvϕ be
the volume measure on (M, ϕ∗ gSn). By standard Riemannian geometry computations,
one can check that the quantity M (|H ϕ |2 + 1) dvϕ is invariant under composition of ϕ
with a conformal change of Sn , that is to say
                                                                    
                                      Ga ◦ϕ 2
                                (|H        | + 1) dvGa ◦ϕ =                  (|H ϕ |2 + 1) dvϕ
                            M                                            M

(9)
  It is also possible to define the conformal volume for surfaces with boundary in the same way.
   The isometry group of Sn is a closed subgroup of Conf(Sn ). Therefore, the quotient is a well-defined
(10)

topological space with the induced topology.
                                                    1244–17


for every a ∈ Bn+1 . In particular, for every a ∈ Bn+1 , we get
                                               
            area(M, g) =              1 dvg =           (|H ϕ |2 + 1) dvϕ
                              M                    M

                          =           (|H Ga ◦ϕ |2 + 1) dvGa ◦ϕ ≥ area(M, (Ga ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn ),
                                  M

where we used that H ≡ 0, since ϕ is minimal, and g = ϕ∗ gSn . By taking the supremum
                      ϕ

over a ∈ Bn+1 and using that area(M, g) = area(M, ϕ∗ gSn ) ≤ Vc (n, ϕ), we get the desired
equality.
  In order to prove Theorem A, we will first obtain minimal immersions with area
bounded by 8π. Then, their embeddedness will be a consequence of the following result.
Proposition 3.2 (Li and Yau, 1982, Corollary 10). — If ϕ : (M, g) → Sn is an
isometric (branched) minimal immersion and area(M, g) < 8π, then ϕ is an embedding.
Proof. — Assume by contradiction that ϕ is not an embedding, then there exists p ∈ Sn
such that the density of ϕ at p (cf. White, 2016, Section 1) is greater than two, namely
                                      area(ϕ−1 (Br (p)), ϕ∗ gSn )
                       Θ(ϕ, p) := lim                             ≥ 2,
                                  r→0            πr2
where Br (p) is the geodesic ball in Sn of center p and radius r. Observe that this takes
into account both the cases where the preimage ϕ−1 (p) contains more than one point
and where p is a branch point for ϕ. We now claim that Vc (n, ϕ) ≥ area(S2 )Θ(ϕ, p) =
4πΘ(ϕ, p) ≥ 8π. This would contradict our assumption area(M, g) < 8π since Vc (n, ϕ) =
area(M, g) by the previous lemma.
   Let us give a heuristic idea of the proof of the inequality Vc (n, ϕ) ≥ area(S2 )Θ(ϕ, p).
For t ∈ (−1, 1), consider the conformal transformation
                                                 1 − t2
                                  Gtp (x) =               (x + tp) + tp.
                                                |x + tp|2
   Note that the map Gtp fixes p and −p and it
converges to the constant map −p on S2 \ {p} as                    p
t → −1. In other words, for t close to −1, Gtp                        Gtp for t < 0
maps a small neighborhood of p onto almost the
entire sphere Sn and the rest of the sphere to a small
neighborhood of −p. As a result, as t approaches −1,
under the map Gtp ◦ ϕ : M → Sn a small neighbor-
hood of each point in ϕ−1 (p) approaches a collection
of equatorial two-spheres (passing through p and −p)              −p
in Sn (Θ(ϕ, p) of them, counted with multiplicity).
The rest of the surface M is mapped to a small neighborhood of −p and has small
area with respect to the induced metric (Gtp ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn . In particular, we get that
area(M, (Gtp ◦ ϕ)∗ gSn ) → area(S2 )Θ(ϕ, p) = 4πΘ(ϕ, p), as desired.
                                              1244–18


   Now, we define the n-conformal volume of (M, [g]), where [g] is the conformal class
of g (recall that Vc (n, ϕ) depends only on [g]), as
(11)                        Vc (n, M, [g]) :=         inf     Vc (n, ϕ).
                                                  ϕ : M →Sn
                                                  conformal

If there are no conformal maps ϕ : M → Sn , we set Vc (n, M, [g]) = ∞.
   Note that Vc (n, M, [g]) < ∞ for every sufficiently large n by Nash’s embedding
theorem, which gives the existence of a conformal map ϕ : M → Sn for all n sufficiently
large. Moreover, Vc (n, M, [g]) ≥ Vc (n + 1, M, [g]), since a conformal map ϕ : M → Sn
can be seen as a conformal map into Sn+1 ⊃ Sn .
   Thanks to a Hersch-type trick (cf. Proposition 1.14), it is possible to bound the first
renormalized Laplace eigenvalue from above by the conformal volume.

Theorem 3.3 (Li and Yau, 1982, Theorem 1). — For every closed Riemannian surface
(M, g) and n ∈ N, we have
                               λ1 (M, g) ≤ 2Vc (n, M, [g]).
Moreover, equality holds if and only if (M, g) can be minimally (branched) immersed
isometrically (up to a rescaling of the metric) in Sn by first eigenfunctions.

Remark 3.4. — The theorem holds also for surfaces (M, g) with boundary (cf. Re-
mark 1.15), by considering the first Laplace eigenvalue λN 1 (M, g) with Neumann bound-
ary conditions, using the variational characterization (7) of the first Neumann eigenvalue.

Proof. — If Vc (n, M, [g]) = ∞, the result is obvious. Therefore, let us assume
Vc (n, M, [g]) < ∞. For every conformal map ϕ : M → Sn ,by the Hersch trick, there
exists a conformal automorphism h : Sn → Sn such that M (h       
                                                                    ◦ ϕ) dvg = 0 ∈ Rn+1 .
Therefore, without loss of generality, we can assume that M ϕ dvg = 0. By the
variational characterization (3) of the first eigenvalue of the Laplacian, we have
                                                             
                                                  2
(12) λ1 (M, g)area(M, g) = λ1 (M, g)            |ϕ| dvg ≤             |dϕ|2 dvg = 2E(ϕ) ≤ 2Vc (n, ϕ),
                                            M                     M

where we used (10) in the last inequality. Since this holds for every conformal map ϕ,
we get the desired inequality.

Remark 3.5. — If we take the supremum over the metrics in the conformal class [g] in
Theorem 3.3, we obtain that
                      Λ1 (M, [g]) := sup λ1 (M, g̃) ≤ 2Vc (n, M, [g]).
                                     g̃∈[g]

Observe that the equality case in the theorem tells us that every minimal immersion
in Sn by first eigenfunctions realizes the maximum of λ1 in its conformal class. In
particular, if ϕ : (M, g) → Sn is an isometric minimal immersion by first eigenfunctions,
then Vc (n, ϕ) = Vc (n, M, [g]) = area(M, g).
                                          1244–19


4. Eigenvalue optimization on basic reflection surfaces

   We now delve into eigenvalue optimization on a surface M for metrics satisfying
suitable symmetry assumptions. This is one of the key aspects of the paper KKMS.
   We mention that equivariant techniques have been fruitfully used to construct exam-
ples of (free boundary) minimal surfaces via other methods too, such as Simon–Smith
min-max (see e.g. Ketover, 2016) and gluing (see e.g. Kapouleas, 2017). Moreover,
Petrides (2023a) used equivariant eigenvalue optimization to construct an embedded,
nonplanar minimal surface in every three-dimensional ellipsoid with suitable properties
(see Petrides, 2023b for the free boundary analogue).

4.1. Basic reflection surfaces
   Unless otherwise stated, let M be a smooth, connected, closed, orientable Riemannian
surface. Given an isometry τ of M , we denote by M τ := {p ∈ M : τ (p) = p} its set of
fixed points.
Definition 4.1 (KKMS, Definition 2.1, Lemma 5.3). — We say that an isometry τ
of M is a reflection if M \ M τ is not connected. Equivalently, dτp : Tp M → Tp M is a
Euclidean reflection (with respect to the metric on M ) for all p ∈ M τ .
Remark 4.2. — By (KKMS, Lemma 2.3), a reflection τ is an involution (i.e., τ 2 = idM ),
M τ is a codimension one submanifold (possibly disconnected), and M \ M τ has exactly
two connected components.
  One of the key ideas in KKMS is to perform equivariant eigenvalue optimization on
so-called basic reflection surfaces (see Figure 5).
Definition 4.3 (KKMS, Definition 5.4). — A pair (M, τ ) is a basic reflection surface
if τ is a reflection on M such that M/⟨τ ⟩ has genus zero.



                                                                           M

              reflection τ
                                                          Mτ



       Figure 5. Example of a closed basic reflection surface (M, τ ) of genus 3. Note
       that M/⟨τ ⟩ is diffeomorphic to a sphere with 4 disks removed, in particular it
       has genus zero.

  The key property of a basic reflection surface is that the quotient M/⟨τ ⟩ has genus
zero. Then, heuristically, equivariant eigenvalue optimization on such surfaces might
be expected to behave well, in line with the nice properties enjoyed for example by
                                           1244–20


Neumann eigenvalue optimization on genus zero surfaces (see e.g. Remark 1.15) or
Steklov eigenvalue optimization on genus zero surfaces. Note for example that the
multiplicity of the first Steklov eigenvalue on genus zero surfaces is at most 3 by (Fraser
and Schoen, 2016, Theorem 2.3). It is possible to recover an analogous multiplicity
bound for the first Laplace eigenvalue on basic reflection surfaces.

Proposition 4.4 (KKMS, Proposition 5.12 and 5.15). — Let (M, τ ) be a closed basic
reflection surface and let g be a Riemannian metric on M which is invariant with respect
to the reflection τ . Then, the multiplicity of the first eigenvalue λ1 (M, g) of the Laplacian
on (M, g) is at most 4.

Proof. — Let us denote by E the first eigenspace of the Laplacian on (M, g). We want
to prove that dim(E) ≤ 4. Note that E is invariant with respect to the action of τ (i.e.,
if u is a first eigenfunction, then u ◦ τ is also a first eigenfunction). Therefore, we can
decompose E as the orthogonal direct sum of its odd part E − := {u ∈ E : u ◦ τ = −u}
and its even part E + := {u ∈ E : u ◦ τ = u} with respect to the reflection τ .
   Recall from Definition 4.1 (see Remark 4.2) that M \ M τ consists of exactly two con-
nected components M1 and M2 . Then, we have the following bounds on the dimensions
of E − and E + , respectively.
   First bound : dim(E − ) ≤ 1. If u ∈ E − then by definition u ◦ τ = −u and hence
u ≡ 0 on M τ . Therefore, u is a Dirichlet eigenfunction on M1 (and M2 ). By Courant’s
nodal domain Theorem 1.6 (see Remark 1.7), u has exactly two nodal domains, which
must coincide with M1 and M2 . Therefore, u|M1 is a Dirichlet eigenfunction which is
never zero on M1 . This implies that u|M1 is a first Dirichlet eigenfunction on M1 . Since
the first Dirichlet eigenspace is simple (see Remark 1.8), we get that dim(E − ) ≤ 1.
   Second bound : dim(E + ) ≤ 3. Let us consider any u ∈ E + , so that u ◦ τ = u. In
particular, u is a Neumann eigenfunction on M1 . We claim that u|M1 has two nodal
domains. Let U+ , U− be the two nodal domains of u in M , i.e., M \ Nu = U+ ⊔ U− ,
where Nu = {u = 0}, U+ = {u > 0}, U− = {u < 0}. Observe that U+ |M1 and U− |M1
are both connected subsets of M1 . Indeed, it is easily observed that, if a subset V of M1
is not connected, then V ∪ τ (V ) is not connected in M (see also KKMS, Lemma 5.14).
As a result, the Neumann eigenfunction u|M1 has exactly two nodal domains. By
Theorem 1.6, Nu is a union of C 2 -immersed circles. Since M1 has genus zero and Nu
divides M1 into two connected components both touching ∂M1 , the nodal set Nu has
to be a single C 2 circle without self-intersections. Therefore, we can apply the Hopf
lemma (see e.g. Gilbarg and Trudinger, 2001, Lemma 3.4) to obtain that, for all p ∈ Nu ,
dup ̸= 0. As a result, if we fix any point p ∈ M1 , then the linear map

                                    T : E + → R × Tp∗ M
                                         u 7→ (u(p), dup )

is injective. Therefore, dim(E + ) ≤ dim(R × Tp∗ M ) = 3.
                                            1244–21


   Recall that the first renormalized Neumann eigenvalue on a genus zero surface is less
than 8π (cf. Remark 1.15). The same holds for the first renormalized Steklov eigenvalue
on genus zero surfaces (Kokarev, 2014, Theorem A1 , see also Example 1.3 therein).
We have a similar upper bound for the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue on basic
reflection surfaces.
Lemma 4.5 (KKMS, Lemma 5.19). — Let (M, τ ) be a closed basic reflection surface
and let g be a metric on M which is invariant with respect to τ . We then have
                                        λ1 (M, g) < 16π.
Proof. — Let M1 ⊂ M be one of the two connected components of M \ M τ . By the
definition of a basic reflection surface, M1 is a genus zero surface with boundary M τ .
Therefore, by Remark 1.15, we have
                                  λN
                                   1 (M1 , g)area(M1 , g) < 8π,

where λN1 (M1 , g) is the first Neumann eigenvalue on (M1 , g). Now note that area(M, g) =
2area(M1 , g), since g is invariant with respect to the reflection τ . Moreover, by the
variational characterization (3) for eigenvalues, we have
                            (                                 
                                |du|2
                                                                                  )
        λN
         1 (M1 , g) = inf
                             
                             M1
                                       : u Lipschitz on M1 ,            u=0
                               M1
                                  |u|2                             M1
                            (                                            
                                  |du|2
                                                                                      )
                   = inf     M         : u τ -even Lipschitz on M ,              u=0
                                   |u|2                                       M
                            (
                                 M
                                                               
                                  |du|2
                                                                              )
                   ≥ inf     M         : u Lipschitz on M ,           u = 0 = λ1 (M, g).
                                 M
                                   |u|2                            M

As a result, we get the desired inequality
                  λ1 (M, g)area(M, g) ≤ 2λN
                                          1 (M1 , g)area(M1 , g) < 16π.


4.2. Equivariant basic reflection surfaces
  Performing equivariant eigenvalue optimization on basic reflection surfaces is already
sufficient to obtain embedded minimal surfaces in S3 with area less than 8π. However,
KKMS imposes further symmetries with respect to a larger group Γ. This lets them
obtain multiple examples of nonisometric minimal surfaces with the same topology.
Definition 4.6. — A pair (M, τ ) is a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface if (M, τ )
is a basic reflection surface, Γ is a finite group generated by reflections of M , and τ is
contained in Γ and commutes with each of its elements. In other words, Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × G
for some finite group G generated by reflections.
Remark 4.7. — To be precise we should distinguish between the group Γ and its action
Γ × M → M on M , as is done in (KKMS, see for example Section 2.3 therein). However,
to simplify our notation, we identify the group and its action. The reader should be
aware that the same group could correspond to different actions.
                                            1244–22


   Sections 5.3, 5.7, 5.8 and 5.9 of KKMS contain many properties and a precise classi-
fication of basic reflection surfaces and group actions as above. Here, we just give an
example in the case when G = Z2 , namely when Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × ⟨ρ⟩ for reflections τ, ρ of M .
   The quotient M/⟨τ ⟩ can be represented as a sphere with γ + 1 disks removed, where
γ is the genus of M . If we impose an extra symmetry with respect to a reflection ρ, the
surface M/⟨τ ⟩ can be represented as a sphere with γ + 1 disks removed, such that the
disks are symmetric with respect to the reflection across an equator (representing the
reflection ρ). In particular, let a be the number of disks centered along the equator and
b be the number of disks in each hemisphere bounded by the equator, in such a way
that a + 2b = γ + 1. See Figure 6.
   Fixing γ ∈ N and performing equivariant eigenvalue optimization on surfaces of this
type, as the number of disks a and b varies, we shall see that it is possible to obtain
⌊ γ−1
   4
      ⌋ + 1 nonisometric minimal embeddings with genus γ in S3 , as stated in Theorem A
(see also Section 6).



                                                     Mτ
                                                                       Mρ
                    reflection ρ




       Figure 6. Representation of M/⟨τ ⟩, half of a Γ-equivariant basic reflection
       surface (M, τ ), where Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × ⟨ρ⟩. The surface M/⟨τ ⟩ is diffeomorphic to a
       sphere with a = 3 disks removed along an equator (which corresponds to M ρ )
       and b = 2 disks removed in each hemisphere. In this case, M has genus γ = 6.


4.3. Equivariant eigenvalue optimization
  Given a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface (M, τ ) as in Definition 4.6, we denote
by MetΓ (M ) the space of Riemannian metrics on M that are invariant with respect to
the action of Γ. Then, we can define
                              ΛΓk (M ) :=      sup        λk (M, g),
                                            g∈MetΓ (M )

and look for a metric g0 that maximizes the kth renormalized Laplace eigenvalue among
Γ-symmetric metrics on M , that is to say λk (M, g0 ) = ΛΓk (M ). By the principle of
symmetric criticality of Palais (1979), one expects that critical points of some eigen-
value in the space of symmetric metrics MetΓ (M ) are also unconstrained critical points.
Since the eigenvalues depend only Lipschitz continuously on g, this needs to be proved,
but goes through without problems, see (KKMS, Theorems 2.12 and 2.15). Moreover,
                                          1244–23


as described above, since (M, τ ) is a basic reflection surface, we expect the equivari-
ant maximizer to have nice properties. In fact, KKMS gets the following result for
equivariant maximizers of the first renormalized eigenvalue.

Theorem 4.8 (cf. KKMS, Theorem 2.12 and Lemma 5.35)
     Let (M, τ ) be a closed Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface with genus(M ) ̸= 0.
If g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ) is a metric maximizing the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue
among the Γ-symmetric metrics on M , then there exist independent first eigenfunctions
u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 such that u := (u1 , u2 , u3 , u4 ) : (M, g0 ) → R4 is an isometric minimal
embedding into S3 . Moreover, the embedding has area less than 8π and it is a doubling
of an equatorial sphere.

Example 4.9 (cf. KKMS, Corollary 2.6). — When the genus of M is equal to 0, in other
words M = S2 is a sphere, it is known that the round metric gS2 on S2 is Γ-invariant for
every finite group Γ acting on S2 . Therefore, using Hersch’s result (Proposition 1.14),
we get
                      8π = λ1 (S2 , gS2 ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (S2 ) ≤ Λ1 (S2 ) = 8π,
which implies that ΛΓ1 (S2 ) = 8π for every finite group Γ.

   We will see in Sections 5 and 6 that a Γ-equivariant maximizing metric as in Theo-
rem 4.8 indeed exists. For now, let us sketch the proof of Theorem 4.8.
Sketch of the proof of Theorem 4.8. — Let g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ) be a metric maximizing λ1
among the Γ-equivariant metrics on M . Up to rescaling g0 , we can assume that
λ1 (M, g0 ) = 2. We can apply Theorem 1.9 to our equivariant setting thanks to the
principle of symmetric criticality of Palais (1979), as described at the beginning of
this section. We obtain that there exist independent first eigenfunctions u1 , . . . , un+1
for some n ≥ 3 such that u := (u1 , . . . , un+1 ) : (M, g0 ) → Sn ⊂ Rn+1 is an isometric
(branched) minimal immersion. Note that n = 3 thanks to Proposition 4.4. Moreover,
by Lemma 4.5, we have
                                            1
                              area(M, g0 ) = λ1 (M, g0 ) < 8π.
                                            2
In particular, by Proposition 3.2, the map u is an embedding.
  We are left with showing that u(M ) is a doubling of an equatorial sphere. This relies
on the fact that the reflection τ on u(M ) is induced by that across an equatorial sphere
in S3 , and the coordinate functions of R4 span the first eigenspace of the Laplacian
on (M, g0 ), for which we know the properties described in the proof of Proposition 4.4.
We refer to (KKMS, Lemma 3.35) for the details.

  We conclude this section with a sort of rigidity property of any minimal embedding of
the type produced by Theorem 4.8, which says that any other map by first eigenfunctions
to Sn must also be an embedding. The usefulness may be unclear now, but it will be
helpful to prove the existence of a maximizing metric in Section 6. Indeed, this result
                                            1244–24


is what makes it somewhat easier to prove the existence of a maximizing metric in this
equivariant setting, compared with the general case.

Proposition 4.10 (cf. KKMS, Theorem 8.5). — Let (M, g) be an orientable Rieman-
nian surface with genus(M ) ̸= 1. Assume that the multiplicity of λ1 (M, g) is 4, and
that there exists a minimal embedding u : (M, g) → S3 by first eigenfunctions. Then,
any other map v : M → Sn by first eigenfunctions of ∆g satisfies v(p) ̸= v(q) for all
p ̸= q ∈ M .

Proof. — When M has genus zero, the only minimal embedding (M, g) → S3 is the one
giving the equatorial sphere and the statement follows. Therefore, let us now assume that
genus(M ) > 1. Since u is an embedding, the components of u span the first eigenspace.
Therefore, we can write v = Au, where A is a matrix with n + 1 rows and 4 columns.
Using that 1 = |v|2 = ⟨Au, Au⟩ = uT AT Au, we have that u(M ) is contained in the
intersection of S3 with the level set {Q(x) = 1} of the quadratic form Q on R4 associated
to AT A (i.e., Q(x) = xT AT Ax). If A has rank 4 then v(p) − v(q) = A(u(p) − u(q)) ̸= 0
for all p ̸= q ∈ M , since u is injective and so is the linear map R4 → Rn+1 attached
to A. If on the other hand A does not have rank 4, (KKMS, p. 101) shows that M must
have genus one, which is excluded by assumption. As a result, A has rank 4 and v is
injective.

Remark 4.11. — We stated the proposition for surfaces with genus greater than one
because it actually fails when genus(M ) = 1. In that case, the only minimal embedding
u : (M, g) → S3 by first eigenfunctions is the one giving the Clifford torus, by (El Soufi
and Ilias, 2000, Theorem 2.1).(11) In particular, (M, g) is (up to homothety) the flat
square torus (T 2 = R2 /Z2 , gflat ) and the first eigenspace is generated by the functions
cos(2πx), sin(2πx), cos(2πy), sin(2πy) (see the proof of Theorem 2.1 in El Soufi and
Ilias, 2000). In particular, the map v : M → S1 given by v(x, y) = (cos(2πx), sin(2πx))
contradicts Proposition 4.10.

4.4. Basic reflection surfaces with boundary
  The definition of a basic reflection surface (M, τ ), Definition 4.3, carries over to the
case where M has boundary, but we additionally require that the double M          f of M
(obtained by gluing two copies of M along its boundary) is a closed basic reflection
surface with respect to the natural extension of τ to M   f . For an equivalent definition
see (KKMS, Definition 5.4).
  The definition of a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface also carries over to the case
where M has boundary. Note that, if (M, τ ) is a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface,
then its double (Mf , τ ) is a Γ-equivariant
                               e             basic reflection surface, where Γ e = ⟨ι⟩ × Γ
and ι is the natural reflection interchanging the two copies of M in M .f

(11)
    Recall that by (Brendle, 2013a) (cf. Example 1.1), we could remove the assumption that u is by
first eigenfunctions.
                                            1244–25


  In this setting, one can define
                              ΣΓ1 (M ) :=      sup        σ 1 (M, g),
                                            g∈MetΓ (M )

and say that a metric g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ) maximizes the first renormalized Steklov eigenvalue
if σ 1 (M, g0 ) = ΣΓ1 (M ). Then, we get the analogue of Theorem 4.8 for surfaces with
boundary.

Theorem 4.12 (cf. KKMS, Theorem 2.15, Lemma 5.37). — Let (M, τ ) be a Γ-
equivariant basic reflection surface with boundary. If g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ) is a metric
on M maximizing the first renormalized Steklov eigenvalue among the Γ-symmetric
metrics on M , then there exist independent first eigenfunctions u1 , u2 , u3 so that u :=
(u1 , u2 , u3 ) : M → R3 is a free boundary minimal embedding in B3 with area less than 2π.
Moreover, the embedding is a doubling of an equatorial disk.

   We do not discuss the proof of this theorem, which presents some further technical
difficulties compared with the closed case, but the main ideas are similar. In Sections 5
and 6, we will discuss the existence of an equivariant maximizing metric. However, again,
we will not go into the details of the case with boundary. For technical reasons, KKMS
does not get existence of a maximizer for every equivariant basic reflection surface with
boundary (see also Remark 6.2). One case in which they do get existence is when (M, τ )
is a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface with Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × ⟨ρ⟩ for two reflections τ, ρ. Let
us discuss this setting in more detail.



                                                                             ∂M

                                                                        Mρ
                     reflection ρ


                                                     Mτ



       Figure 7. Schematic representation of M/⟨τ ⟩, half of a Γ-equivariant basic
       reflection surface (M, τ ), where Γ = ⟨τ ⟩ × ⟨ρ⟩. The surface M is obtained
       by gluing two copies of M/⟨τ ⟩ along M τ . In this case, M has genus 9 and 3
       boundary components.

   Half of the surface M/⟨τ ⟩ can be represented as a disk with γ disks removed in the
interior and β half-disks removed along the boundary. Here, γ and β correspond to the
genus and the number of boundary components of M . The extra symmetry ρ can be
represented as the reflection across a diameter of the disk. In this way, all the removed
                                         1244–26


disks are symmetric with respect to this reflection. In particular, we have a of these
disks centered along the diameter and b of them centered in each half-disk bounded by
the diameter, in such a way that a + 2b = γ. See Figure 7.
   One can perform equivariant eigenvalue optimization on (Z2 × Z2 )-equivariant basic
reflection surfaces as the action of Z2 × Z2 on M varies in order to have different values
of a and b. In this way, one can obtain ⌊ γ−2
                                            4
                                              ⌋ + 1 nonisometric free boundary minimal
embeddings with genus γ and β boundary components in B3 , as stated in Theorem B.



5. Existence of a conformal eigenvalue maximizer

  Thanks to Theorem 4.8, in order to prove Theorem A, we are left with the proof of
the existence of a maximizing metric g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ). The first step, discussed in this
section, is to prove the existence of a maximizer among the Γ-equivariant metrics in
every given conformal class [g]. More precisely, defining
                  ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) := sup{λ1 (M, g̃) : g̃ ∈ MetΓ (M ) ∩ [g]},
the following theorem states that, under suitable assumptions, there is a metric g0 ∈
MetΓ (M )∩[g] maximizing the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue among Γ-equivariant
metrics in [g], that is to say λ1 (M, g0 ) = ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).

Theorem 5.1 (Petrides, 2014; KKMS, Theorem 3.12). — Let (M, τ ) be a Γ-equivariant
basic reflection surface. Consider g ∈ MetΓ (M ) such that ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) > 8π. Then there
exists a metric g0 ∈ MetΓ (M )∩[g], smooth away from finitely many conical singularities,
maximizing the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue among Γ-equivariant metrics in [g].
Moreover, there exists a harmonic map u : (M, g0 ) → Sn by first eigenfunctions, for some
n ∈ N.

Remark 5.2. — Observe that, by maximizing in a conformal class, we only get a har-
monic map and not a minimal immersion. This is because we cannot guarantee in
general that the immersion is an isometry (cf. Remark 1.4).

Remark 5.3. — Note that, thanks to Theorem 3.3, if u : (M, g) → Sn is an isometric
immersion by first eigenfunctions, then g maximizes the first renormalized eigenvalue λ1
in its conformal class [g]. Moreover, by (Montiel and Ros, 1986, Theorem 1), there exists
at most one such metric in each conformal class. However, this uniqueness regards the
intrinsic metric on M . We do not know whether the same metric on M can give rise to
minimal immersions that are not related by an ambient isometry.

Remark 5.4. — When M is not a sphere, for every conformal class [g], the strict
inequality Λ1 (M, [g]) > 8π was proven by Petrides (2014, Theorem 1) in the case
without symmetry and, in Section 6, we will see that it also holds in our setting with
symmetry.
                                                 1244–27


   Theorem 5.1 in the case without symmetry was first proved by Petrides (2014), using
a method which was later refined in (Petrides, 2025). The proof is based on Ekeland’s
variational principle, which allows one to find a maximizing sequence of metrics(12)
in [g] and associated maps by first eigenfunctions, which are almost harmonic. Careful
analysis shows that this sequence of metrics converges to a maximizer for λ1 in [g]. See
also (Petrides, 2026) for more details.
   Subsequently, other proofs have been obtained (see e.g. Vinokurov, 2025). Here, we
describe in more detail the approach taken by Karpukhin, Kusner, McGrath, and Stern
(KKMS, Sections 3 and 4), since it is based on a min-max characterization of ΛΓ1 (M )
developed in (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c) which is of independent interest.

5.1. Definition of min-max energy and first results
   The idea is to define a min-max energy En (M, [g]), inspired by the Li–Yau conformal
volume Vc (n, M, [g]) presented in Section 3, such that not only Λ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2En (M, [g])
(as in Theorem 3.3 for the Li–Yau conformal volume), but also equality holds for every
sufficiently large n. Indeed, as explained in (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c, Section 2.4),
the min-max energy En (M, [g]) can be thought as a relaxation of the conformal volume
Vc (n, M, [g]) such that Theorem 3.3 and its proof still hold. The energies En (M, [g]) are
defined on suitable spaces of maps and, by running a min-max scheme for these energies,
the authors produce a special harmonic map which induces the desired maximizing
metric for λ1 in [g].
   Given the subset {Ga }a∈Bn+1 of conformal transformations of Sn defined in (9), we
recall from (11) that
                                                                
                                                                    1
     Vc (n, M, [g]) := inf n sup E(Ga ◦ ϕ) = inf n sup                |d(Ga ◦ ϕ)|2 dvg .
                      ϕ : M →S a∈Bn+1            ϕ : M →S a∈Bn+1 M 2
                         conformal                           conformal
                   n+1
Now, let C 0 (B , W 1,2 (M, Sn )) be the space of continuous functions from the closed
      n+1
ball B    to the Sobolev space W 1,2 (M, Sn ). We then define its subset Ben as the set
                                      n+1
of functions F = (a 7→ Fa ) ∈ C 0 (B , W 1,2 (M, Sn )) such that Fa ≡ a for all a ∈ Sn ,
meaning that Fa is equal to the constant function equal to a for all a ∈ Sn . The first
idea of Karpukhin and Stern (2024c) is to relax the definition of conformal volume to(13)
                                                            
                                                                1
              En (M, [g]) := inf sup E(Fa ) = inf sup
              e                                                   |dFa |2 dvg ,
                               en a∈Bn+1
                            F ∈B                   en a∈Bn+1 M 2
                                                F ∈B
                                                                                   
The key is that, if F ∈ Ben , then there exists a ∈ Bn+1 such that M Fa = 0 by topological
degree theory. Thus, by the variational characterization of the first eigenvalue we get
                                                                              
                                                                    2
       λ1 (M, g) = λ1 (M, g)area(M, g) = λ1 (M, g)               |Fa | dvg ≤           |dFa |2 dvg = 2E(Fa ),
                                                             M                     M

(12)
     To be precise, one first has to consider a suitable weak notion of metrics, and then prove that the
maximizer is smooth away from finitely many conical singularities.
(13)
     Note that we use the tilde here, i.e., Een , because this is not the final definition of the energy En ,
which will be given in Definition 5.7.
                                                    1244–28


exactly as in (12), which is the core inequality in the proof of Theorem 3.3. Taking the
infimum over all F ∈ Ben and the supremum over all g̃ ∈ [g], we then get
(13)                                    Λ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2Een (M, [g]).
                                                                             n+1
Remark 5.5. — Note that the maps Fa , for F ∈ Ben and a ∈ B , are not necessarily
conformal. Conformality of Ga ◦ ϕ was needed in the Li–Yau construction to have
area(Ga ◦ ϕ) = E(Ga ◦ ϕ) (see (8)).

   It is well known that the Dirichlet energy E presents a lack of compactness due
to its conformal invariance. Therefore, it is often convenient to perturb the Dirichlet
functional to a functional Eε that approaches E as ε → 0 and has some compactness
property for ε > 0 (e.g. the Palais–Smale condition, see e.g. Ambrosetti and Malchiodi,
2007, Section 7.4), which allows one to find critical points easily. This idea was first
introduced by Sacks and Uhlenbeck (1981) and the second ingredient in (Karpukhin
and Stern, 2024c) is indeed a similar perturbation. In particular, they consider the
Ginzburg–Landau approximation of the Dirichlet energy introduced by Chen (1989)
and Chen and Struwe (1989):
                                        
                                              1         (1 − |u|2 )2
                            Eε (u) :=           |du|2 +              dvg ≥ E(u),
                                            M 2             4ε2
defined for functions u ∈ W 1,2 (M, Rn+1 ). The second term in the integrand is called
the potential term.

Remark 5.6. — The choice of the Ginzburg–Landau energy is not essential; the Sacks–
Uhlenbeck perturbation could potentially work too.

  Note that Eε (u) = E(u) if u takes values in Sn . Moreover, Eε is nondecreasing
as ε ↘ 0. Therefore, the following energies are well-defined.

Definition 5.7 (cf. Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c, Section 3)
  For every ε > 0, we define the perturbed min-max energy
                                   En,ε (M, g) := inf max  Eε (Fa ),
                                                     F ∈Bn a∈B
                                                       n+1

                                     n+1
where(14) Bn = {F ∈ C 0 (B , W 1,2 (M, Rn+1 )) : Fa ≡ a for a ∈ Sn }. As ε ↘ 0,
En,ε (M, g) is nondecreasing. Thus, we can define
                             En (M, g) := sup En,ε (M, g) = lim En,ε (M, g).
                                              ε>0                ε↘0

  As mentioned above, the definition of En is devised to be a relaxation of the conformal
volume such that Theorem 3.3 still holds. We make this precise in the following
proposition.

(14)
       The difference with Ben is that we now allow the maps to take values in Rn+1 and not only in Sn .
                                              1244–29


Proposition 5.8 (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c, Section 3.1)
  The energy En (M, g) is a conformal invariant, and we write En (M, [g]) := En (M, g).
Moreover, for every n ≥ 2, we have
                       Λ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2En (M, [g]) ≤ 2Vc (n, M, [g]) < ∞.

Idea of the proof. — Note that the energies En,ε (M, g) are not conformally invariant
because of the potential term in the definition of Eε . However, for every g̃ ∈ [g], there
exists C = C(g, g̃) > 0 such that En,Cε (M, g) ≤ En,ε (M, g̃) ≤ En,ε/C (M, g). Taking the
limit as ε → 0, we get En (M, g) = En (M, g̃) = En (M, [g]).
   The inequality En (M, [g]) ≤ Vc (n, M, [g]) follows from the fact that every map
  n+1
B     ∋ a 7→ Ga ◦ ϕ ∈ W 1,2 (M, Sn ), in the definition of Vc (n, M, [g]), can be approxi-
mated by maps in Bn by mollification. We refer to (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c,
Proposition 3.3) for the details of the proof.
   We are left with the proof of the inequality Λ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2En (M, [g]). The idea is the
same as for the proof of (13). Here, the difference is that En (M, [g]) is obtained as an
approximation of the energies En,ε (M, [g]). Therefore, one first proves that
                                  1−ε              Γ
                                      λ1 (M, g) ≤ En,ε (M, g),
                                  2+ε
by using a similar argument but taking care of the potential term (see Karpukhin and
Stern, 2024c, Proposition 3.4 and KKMS, Proposition 3.4). Then, one gets the desired
inequality by taking the limit as ε → 0.

   The third and final ingredient to adapt the energy En (M, [g]) to the setting of KKMS
is to consider its equivariant adaptation. Let (M, g) be a closed, smooth, Riemannian
surface and let Γ be a finite group of isometries of M (in particular, this applies to
the case when (M, τ ) is a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface and g ∈ MetΓ (M )).
Then, (KKMS, Section 3) replaces the set Bn in the definition of En,ε (M, g) with a
                                  m
suitable subset(15) BmΓ
                         of C 0 (B , WΓ1,2 (M, Rm|Γ| )), where WΓ1,2 (M, Rm|Γ| ) is the set of
Γ-equivariant W 1,2 Sobolev maps with respect to a natural action of Γ on Rm|Γ| .
   Then, again, one can define
                                 Γ
                                Em,ε (M, g) := infΓ max
                                                      m
                                                        Eε (Fa )
                                                 F ∈Bm a∈B

and
                 Γ             Γ                Γ                 Γ
                Em (M, [g]) = Em (M, g) := sup Em,ε (M, g) = lim Em,ε (M, g).
                                               ε>0                 ε↘0

By similar arguments as in the proof of Proposition 5.8, we get the inequality
                 Γ
ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2Em (M, [g]) < ∞, for every m sufficiently large (cf. KKMS, Lemma 3.3
and Proposition 3.4).

(15)
   Note that we use the index m instead of n for the equivariant setting, because we use n + 1 for the
dimension of the target space Rn+1 (see e.g. Theorem 5.17 below).
                                           1244–30


5.2. Min-max characterization of the first conformal eigenvalue
  We now show that the inequality ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) ≤ 2Em  Γ
                                                        (M, [g]) is actually an equality for
every m sufficiently large, obtaining the following min-max characterization for the first
conformal eigenvalue.

Theorem 5.9 (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c, Theorem 1.3, KKMS, Theorem 3.11)
  For every m ∈ N sufficiently large, if ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) > 8π, then we have
                                 ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) = 2Em
                                                  Γ
                                                    (M, [g]).

Remark 5.10. — Karpukhin and Stern (2024c, Theorem 1.13) find a min-max charac-
terization for the second conformal eigenvalue, but it is still not known if there is an
analogous result for Λk (M, [g]) with k > 2.

   We keep discussing the Γ-equivariant case, but the proofs are similar to the case
without equivariance and the reader interested in the nonequivariant setting can ignore
the group Γ for the rest of the section. Note that in (KKMS, Section 3), the authors
adapt the proofs in (Karpukhin and Stern, 2024c) to the equivariant setting, simplifying
some of the arguments. Figure 8 contains a schematic representation of the main
elements in the proof presented in this section.

        Perturbed energy                                     Min-max energy
          (Lemma 5.11)             (Proposition 5.15)         (Theorem 5.17)

   Γ                                      ε→0            Γ (M, [g])
  Em,ε (M, g) = inf max
                      m
                        Eε (Fa )                        Em
                       Γ a∈B
                   F ∈Bm
        =                                                   =
    Eε (um,ε )                                            E(um )

                                    smoothly
  um,ε : M → Rm|Γ|                                      um : M → Sn ⊂ Rm|Γ|−1 harmonic


            1 − |um,ε |2             smoothly                1
  gm,ε :=                g                              gm := |dum |2 g
               2ε2                                           2
  λ1 (M, gm,ε ) ∼ ΛΓ1 (M, [g])              Γ (M, [g]) = 2E(u ) = λ (M, g ) = ΛΓ (M, [g])
                                          2Em                m     1     m     1


       Figure 8. Schematic representation of the proof of the min-max characteriza-
       tion of the first conformal eigenvalue. This scheme holds for every m sufficiently
       large, namely the energies Em  Γ (M, [g]) stabilize equal to ΛΓ (M, [g]) as m → ∞.
                                                                     1


   As a byproduct of the proof of Theorem 5.9, we get a proof of Theorem 5.1. In-
deed, we aim to obtain a harmonic map um whose associated metric gm := 12 |dum |2 g
maximizes λ1 in its conformal class (for every m sufficiently large) and such that
ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) = λ1 (M, gm ) = 2E(um ) = 2Em
                                         Γ
                                           (M, [g]) (see Theorem 5.17). To do this, we
                                          1244–31


first study the perturbed problem, we get maps um,ε and metrics gm,ε , and then we
prove smooth convergence as ε → 0.
   The first step is to fix m ∈ N, and consider critical points um,ε ∈ WΓ1,2 (M, Rm|Γ| )
for ε > 0. The existence of such critical points follows from standard arguments in
the calculus of variations, given that Eε satisfies a Palais–Smale condition (see KKMS,
Proposition 3.1(iii)):
Lemma 5.11 (KKMS, Lemma 3.2 and Propositions 3.1 and 3.6)
   For every m ∈ N and ε > 0, there exists a smooth Γ-equivariant critical point
um,ε ∈ WΓ1,2 (M, Rm|Γ| ) for Eε that realizes the perturbed min-max energy Em,ε
                                                                            Γ
                                                                                (M, g), i.e.,
                                                Γ
                                  Eε (um,ε ) = Em,ε (M, g).
Moreover, we have that:
                                                                   2
                                                                   |
  (i) um,ε solves the Euler–Lagrange equation ∆g um,ε + 1−|uεm,ε 2   um,ε = 0 for Eε ;
                                                        1−|um,ε |2
 (ii) |um,ε | < 1, and in particular the metric gm,ε := 2ε2 g ∈ [g] is well defined;
(iii) the Γ-equivariant Morse index indΓEε (um,ε ) of um,ε is at most m;
(iv) there is a universal constant C > 0 such that, for every sufficiently large m,
                                                         C
                                   λ1 (M, gm,ε ) ≥ 2 −     .
                                                         m
Remark 5.12. — Note that our definition of gm,ε differs from that in (KKMS, Proposi-
tion 3.6) by a factor of 12 . As a consequence, we have a different constant in the estimate
in item (iv).
Proof. — We give a brief outline of the proof. The existence of a smooth critical
point um,ε satisfying the desired index bound follows from standard min-max methods
(see e.g. Ambrosetti and Malchiodi, 2007, Chapter 8), since Eε satisfies the Palais–Smale
condition, and from elliptic regularity (cf. KKMS, Proposition 3.1 and Lemma 3.2). The
                                                                       Γ
index bound holds because the maximum in the definition of Em,ε           (M, g) is over an m-
dimensional parameter space. The bound |um,ε | < 1 is deduced using the inequality
                                 |2
∆g (1 − |um,ε |2 ) ≥ −2 1−|uεm,ε
                             2      |um,ε |2 and the elliptic maximum principle.
   We are left with (iv), which is the most delicate point, and is derived from the index
bound indΓEε (um,ε ) ≤ m. The idea is to use the constant vector fields in Rm|Γ| and the
first eigenfunction of ∆gm,ε to construct a number of negative directions for the second
derivative of Eε at um,ε , whose existence violates the index bound indΓEε (um,ε ) ≤ m
                               C
unless λ1 (M, gm,ε ) ≥ 2 − m     . See (KKMS, Proposition 3.6) for the details.
   A consequence of the previous lemma is that the metric gm,ε from the statement
is close to being a maximizer of the first renormalized eigenvalue λ1 in the conformal
class [g], when m is sufficiently large and ε is sufficiently small.
Corollary 5.13. — Given a metric gm,ε as in Lemma 5.11, we have that
                           C
                            
                      2−     E Γ (M, g) ≤ λ1 (M, gm,ε ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).
                           m m,ε
                                              1244–32


                              Γ              Γ
Remark 5.14. — Since limε→0 2Em,ε (M, g) = 2Em (M, [g]) ≥ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]), we get
                          C
                               
(14)                  1−    ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) ≤ lim λ1 (M, gm,ε ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).
                         2m                ε→0

In this sense, we say that gm,ε is close to be a maximizer for λ1 in [g] if m is large and
ε is small enough.

Proof. — Observe that
                                 
   Γ                               1         2    (1 − |um,ε |2 )2
  Em,ε (M, g) = Eε (um,ε ) =         |dum,ε | +                    dvg
                                 M 2                    4ε2
                                                          
        (1 − |um,ε |2 )        2   (1 − |um,ε |2 )2              (1 − |um,ε |2 ) (1 + |um,ε |2 )
  =                     |um,ε |  +                  dvg =                       ·                dvg
      M     2ε2                         4ε2                  M       2ε2               2
    
        (1 − |um,ε |2 )
  ≤                      dvg = area(M, gm,ε ),
      M     2ε2
where we integrated by parts and we used (i) and (ii) from Lemma 5.11. As a result,
using (iv), we conclude the desired inequality
                                                                    C
                                                                      
                                                                       Γ
           λ1 (M, gm,ε ) = λ1 (M, gm,ε )area(M, gm,ε ) ≥ 2 −          Em,ε (M, gm,ε ).
                                                                    m

  The next step is to show that, fixed m ∈ N sufficiently large, the maps um,ε : M →
 m|Γ|
R     converge smoothly as ε → 0 to a harmonic map um : M → Sm|Γ|−1 ⊂ Rm|Γ| , whose
                                      Γ
Dirichlet energy realizes the energy Em (M, [g]).

Proposition 5.15 (KKMS, Propositions 3.6 and 3.9). — For any m ∈ N and ε > 0,
let um,ε be a map satisfying the properties in Lemma 5.11. Then, for every sufficiently
large m ∈ N, up to extracting a subsequence the maps um,ε converge smoothly as ε → 0
to a smooth Γ-equivariant harmonic map um : M → Sm|Γ|−1 such that
                             Γ
                   E(um ) = Em (M, [g]),       indΓE (um ) ≤ m,     |dum |2g ≤ C,
where C > 0 is a constant independent of m. In particular, the associated metrics gm,ε
from Lemma 5.11 converge smoothly as ε → 0 to the (well-defined, smooth with possibly
finitely many conical singularities) metric gm := 12 |dum |2g g ∈ [g], as ε → 0.

Remark 5.16. — As a consequence of (14), the metric gm in the statement satisfies
                               C
                                   
(15)                       1−    ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) ≤ λ1 (M, gm ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).
                              2m
Idea of the proof. — We give a rough idea of the proof, which requires some careful
analysis. Let um,ε ∈ WΓ1,2 (M, Rm|Γ| ) be the critical points of Eε from Lemma 5.11.
The idea is to show that bubbling cannot appear in the limit of um,ε as ε → 0. This
follows from the bound λ1 (gm,ε ) ≥ 2 − C/m from Lemma 5.11(iv) and the assumption
                                               1244–33


ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) > 8π (see KKMS, Lemma 3.8 and Proposition 3.9). The Euler–Lagrange
equation for um,ε in Lemma 5.11(i) is also used. In particular, one shows that
                                           1 − |um,ε |2
(16)                                                    ≤ C,
                                               ε2
for some C = C(M, g), which together with the Euler–Lagrange equation implies smooth
convergence to a harmonic map u : M → Sm|Γ|−1 (cf. KKMS, Proposition 3.9).
                                          (1−|um,ε |2 )2
  Note that the potential terms        M        ε2
                                                          dvg converge to 0 as ε → 0 by (16). Thus
                                                 Γ             Γ
                  E(um ) = lim Eε (um,ε ) = lim Em,ε (M, g) = Em (M, [g]).
                            ε→0                  ε→0

  Finally, by the smooth convergence um,ε → um as ε → 0, using the Euler–Lagrange
equation −∆g um = |dum |2g um for harmonic maps, we have

              2                                                (1 − |um,ε |2 )|um,ε |2
        |dum |g = ⟨−∆g um , um ⟩ = lim⟨−∆g um,ε , um,ε ⟩ = lim           2
                                   ε→0                     ε→0               ε
                      1 − |um,ε |2
                = lim              .
                  ε→0     ε2
                               2
                               |
Recall that the terms 1−|uεm,ε
                           2     are uniformly bounded by (16). Therefore, |dum |2g is also
                                                                           |2
uniformly bounded independently of m, and we obtain that gm,ε = 1−|u2εm,ε2    g converges
                   1      2
smoothly to gm = 2 |dum |g g as ε → 0.

  The final step consists in proving that the metrics gm = 12 |dum |2 g are not only close to
maximizing the first Γ-equivariant renormalized eigenvalue in [g] (cf. (15)), but actually
maximize it for every sufficiently large m. In particular, the following results prove
Theorems 5.1 and 5.9.

Theorem 5.17 (KKMS, Lemma 3.10 and Theorem 3.11). — Let um : M → Sm|Γ|−1 ,
m ∈ N, be any family of Γ-equivariant harmonic maps satisfying the properties of
Proposition 5.15. Then, for every m sufficiently large, the metric gm := 12 |dum |2 g
maximizes λ1 among Γ-equivariant metrics in [g]. In particular, we obtain
                   ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) = λ1 (M, gm ) = 2E(um ) = 2Em
                                                            Γ
                                                              (M, [g]).
Moreover, there exists a number n = n(M, [g]) such that um takes values in a totally
geodesic sphere of dimension n, i.e., um (M ) ⊂ Sn ⊂ Sm|Γ|−1 .

Sketch of the proof. — One first bounds the dimension of the image of um . Assuming
it is not bounded, the space spanned by the coordinate functions of um has dimension
going to infinity as m → ∞. However, the coordinate functions of um are eigenfunctions
with eigenvalue 2 of ∆gm . As a result, we get limm→∞ λk (gm ) ≤ 2 for all k ∈ N. By the
Bochner identity for sphere-valued harmonic maps (see Karpukhin and Stern, 2024a,
Section 3), we have that |dum |2g is uniformly bounded in W 1,2 (M ) and thus, up to passing
to a subsequence, we find ρ ∈ W 1,2 (M ) such that 12 |dum |2g → ρ in Lp for all p ∈ [1, ∞).
                                               1244–34


In particular, λk (M, ρg) = limm→∞ λk (gm ) ∈ [0, 2]. However, this contradicts(16) the
fact that λk (M, ρg) → ∞ as k → ∞.
  Next, one shows that λ1 (M, gm ) = 2. The proof is similar to Lemma 5.11(iv). Namely,
one uses the constant vectors on Rm|Γ| as test functions for the second derivative of
the energy E at um , and the index bound indΓE (um ) ≤ m. However, we can now
use as test functions the constant vectors orthogonal to the image um (M ), which is
contained in a sphere Sn of bounded dimension independent of m. This helps improve
the estimate to λ1 (M, gm ) ≥ 2. The inequality λ1 (M, gm ) ≤ 2 follows from the fact that
the coordinates of um are eigenfunctions with eigenvalue 2, therefore we get the desired
equality λ1 (M, gm ) = 2. This concludes the proof, since
                                                                           
             ΛΓ1 (M, [g]) ≥ λ1 (M, gm ) = λ1 (M, gm )area(M, gm ) =                |dum |2g dvg
                                                                               M
                                        Γ
                          = 2E(um ) = 2Em (M, [g]) ≥ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).

   Let us conclude this section with a corollary of the min-max characterization of
ΛΓ1 (M, [g]), which will be useful in the next section.

Corollary 5.18 (cf. Karpukhin, Nahon, Polterovich, and Stern, 2025, Proposition 3.1,
Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern, 2025, Proposition 2.2)
   Under the assumptions of Theorem 5.1, there exists n = n(M, [g]) ∈ N such that,
for every continuous linear functional T : W 1,2 (M,
                                                  
                                                      Rn+1 ) → R, there exists a map
f ∈ W 1,2 (M, Sn ) such that T (f ) = 0 ∈ Rn+1 and M |df |2g dvg ≤ ΛΓ1 (M, [g]).
                                                                                          Γ
   We do not give the proof of this result, but the key idea is that, for every F ∈ Bm      ,
we can choose a ∈ Bm+1 such that T (Fa ) = 0. Using the min-max characterization of
ΛΓ1 (M, [g]), this leads to the
                             
                                desired result. Note that this is the same principle that we
used above with T (f ) = M f dvg , generalized to any linear operator T .



6. Existence of an eigenvalue maximizer

   The following theorem asserts the existence of a metric maximizing the first renormal-
ized Laplace eigenvalue among the symmetric metrics on any equivariant basic reflection
surface (see Section 4.3). This section is devoted to its proof.

Theorem 6.1 (KKMS, Theorem 8.7). — Let (M, τ ) be a closed Γ-equivariant basic
reflection surface. There then exists a metric g0 ∈ MetΓ (M ) (smooth away from finitely
many conical singularities) maximizing the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue on M
among Γ-equivariant metrics.

(16)
   Although ρg is not smooth, its spectrum is still well defined, is discrete, and converges to infinity,
see e.g. (Kokarev, 2014, Proposition 1.3).
                                           1244–35


Remark 6.2. — A version of this theorem works for the first renormalized Steklov
eigenvalue on surfaces with boundary, but does not cover all possible equivariant basic
reflection surfaces with boundary (see KKMS, Theorem 9.15). As mentioned in Sec-
tion 4.4, the case when Γ = Z2 × Z2 , which is sufficient to get all possible topologies
and prove Theorem B together with Theorem 4.12, is covered by KKMS.

6.1. Degenerations at the boundary of the moduli space of conformal classes
   Let gn be a maximizing sequence of metrics in MetΓ (M ) for ΛΓ1 (M ), that is to
say λ1 (M, gn ) goes to ΛΓ1 (M ) as n → ∞. Thanks to Theorem 5.17, without loss of
generality, we can assume that gn maximizes the first renormalized Laplace eigenvalue
in its conformal class, i.e., λ1 (M, gn ) = ΛΓ1 (M, [gn ]). If gn converges (in some good sense)
to a metric g0 on M , then we conclude that g0 is the desired maximizing metric by
arguing that λ1 (M, g0 ) = limn→∞ λ1 (M, gn ) = limn→∞ ΛΓ1 (M, [gn ]) = ΛΓ1 (M ).
   However, a priori, the conformal classes [gn ] could converge to the boundary of the
space of (equivariant) conformal classes on M , as we will see in the proof of Theorem 6.7.
In this case, one can show that the sequence of Riemannian surfaces (M, gn ) converges
to a Riemannian manifold (M ′ , g ′ ), which is a topological degeneration of M , as defined
below.

Definition 6.3 (cf. KKMS, Definition 6.1). — Let M, M ′ be two closed(17) Riemannian
surfaces and let Γ be a finite group acting on M and M ′ by isometries. We say M ′ is a
                                                     Γ
topological Γ-degeneration of M , and write M ′ ≺      M , if M ′ is obtained from M via a
Γ-equivariant surgery. That is, if M ′ is obtained from M by removing a Γ-equivariant
set U consisting of a disjoint union of annuli that are not homotopically trivial and gluing
a disk to each boundary component of M \ U (two disks for each annulus removed).




                                            surgery
                      M                                              M′




       Figure 9. Representation of one of the surgeries described in Definition 6.3,
       consisting of removing an annulus and gluing in two disks. Note that a Γ-
       equivariant surgery consists of multiple surgeries in such a way that the proce-
       dure is equivariant.


(17)
   The definition in KKMS requires the surfaces to be connected. We remove this assumption to
simplify the exposition.
                                             1244–36


Remark 6.4. — Note that these degenerations are the same ones that occur when
one tries to find a surface M ′ minimizing the area in the isotopy class of a given
surface M , as described by Meeks, Simon, and Yau (1982). Moreover, these are the
same pathologies that one encounters when applying a Simon–Smith min-max procedure
to obtain minimal surfaces, cf. (De Lellis and Pellandini, 2010, Section 2.2).

Remark 6.5. — For the entirety of this exposition, we discuss only the case of orientable
surfaces. In KKMS, nonorientable surfaces are also considered. In that case, the
definition of surgery allows not only for annuli to be removed but also Möbius strips.

Remark 6.6. — It is possible to describe all Γ-equivariant surgeries of a Γ-equivariant
basic reflection surface, see (KKMS, Propositions 6.4, 6.5, 6.6). In particular, if (M, τ )
is a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface and M ′ is a topological Γ-degeneration of M ,
then (M ′ , τ ) is also a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface.

  The following theorem provides a condition which precludes the convergence of max-
imizing sequence gn for ΛΓ1 (M ) (as introduced above) to the boundary of the moduli
space of conformal classes on M . Namely, it is sufficient to check that the value of ΛΓ1
on M is greater than its value on all topological Γ-degenerations.

Theorem 6.7 (Petrides, 2014, Theorem 2, KKMS, Theorems 7.6 and 7.7)
  Let (M, τ ) be a Γ-equivariant basic reflection surface. If
(17)                  ΛΓ1 (M ) > max{ΛΓ1 (M ′ ) : M ′ ≺
                                                      Γ
                                                        M, M ′ ̸= M },
then there exists a Γ-equivariant metric g0 on M realizing ΛΓ1 (M ). This metric is smooth
up to finitely many conical singularities.

Ideas of the proof. — First observe that, if the statement holds and M is not a topologi-
cal sphere, then ΛΓ1 (M ) > 8π. Indeed, by the characterization of all possible topological
Γ-degenerations in (KKMS, Proposition 6.4, 6.5 and 6.6) (see also the discussion at the
beginning of the proof of KKMS, Theorem 8.7), then starting from M and performing
a succession of Γ-equivariant surgeries, it is possible to obtain a topological sphere,
for which we know that ΛΓ1 (S2 ) = 8π (see Example 4.9). In particular, we get that
ΛΓ1 (M ) > ΛΓ1 (S2 ) = 8π and we can apply Theorem 5.1.
   Let gn be a sequence of metrics such that ΛΓ1 (M, [gn ]) → ΛΓ1 (M ). By Theorem 5.1,
we can assume λ1 (M, gn ) = ΛΓ1 (M, [gn ]). The idea is that, up to a subsequence, (M, gn )
converges (in a suitable sense) to a topological Γ-degeneration (M ′ , g ′ ) of M , such that
       ΛΓ1 (M ′ ) ≥ λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) ≥ lim sup λ1 (M, gn ) = lim sup ΛΓ1 (M, [gn ]) = ΛΓ1 (M ).
                                    n→∞                     n→∞

By the assumption (17), this implies that the degeneration M ′ has to be trivial equal
to M and g0 = g ′ is the desired maximizing metric.
  The proof of what we just stated is based on two steps:
                                         1244–37


   – First, one needs to appeal to a compactness result to show that, up to a subsequence,
     (M, gn ) converges to a topological Γ-degeneration (M ′ , g ′ ). The convergence is
     roughly defined as local smooth convergence away from the surgery regions, up to
     composing with diffeomorphisms of M . We refer to (KKMS, Theorem 7.4) for a
     precise statement.
   – The second step is to prove λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) ≥ lim supn→∞ λ1 (M, gn ), the upper semi-
     continuity along the sequence. This, a priori, is not always true and follows from
     a careful analysis of gn as n → ∞, which was first performed in (Petrides, 2014,
     Section 4). We refer to (KKMS, Theorem 7.6) for the proof, but remark here
     that the inequality ΛΓ1 (M ) > 8π is used to prevent the formation of bubbles and
     concentration of energy in the surgery regions via Hersch-type arguments.



6.2. New technical ingredients in KKMS
   Thanks to the previous theorem, the proof of Theorem 6.1 reduces to showing the strict
inequality (17). In order to do this, Karpukhin, Kusner, McGrath, and Stern (KKMS)
introduced a new method. Indeed, proving this strict inequality turns out to be very
delicate. In the nonequivariant case, there had been many failed attempts before KKMS.
Those attempts tried to prove the inequality directly, by taking a metric g ′ on M ′ and
explicitly constructing a metric g on M , where M ′ is obtained by M through surgeries
along some necks, such that λ1 (M, g) > λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ). Unfortunately, this approach turned
out not to be fruitful. We now explain the new techniques introduced in KKMS. We
present a sketch of the proof, with simplifications by Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern
(2025) and personal communication with the authors.
Sketch of the proof of Theorem 6.1. — Assume by contradiction that there exists a Γ-
equivariant basic reflection surface (M, τ ) and a topological Γ-degeneration M ′ of M
such that ΛΓ1 (M ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M ′ ). To simplify the discussion, let us only discuss the case
when M ′ is obtained from M via surgery on a single neck. In other words, the surface M ′
is obtained from M by removing an annulus (which is not homotopically trivial) and
                           Γ
gluing in two disks. Since ≺   is a well-defined partial ordering, arguing by induction, we
can assume that M admits a maximizing metric g ′ , i.e., λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) = ΛΓ1 (M ′ ).
                    ′

   Since M is obtained by M ′ via surgery on one neck, M can be recovered from M ′
by removing two disks around two points p, q ∈ M ′ and gluing in an annulus. More
precisely, we can consider two disks Dε (p), Dε (q) in M and consider the metric gε on M
(for ε > 0 sufficiently small) obtained by removing from M ′ the two disks Dε (p), Dε (q)
and gluing in the flat cylinder Cε = S1ε × [0, 2ε] to ∂Dε (p) and ∂Dε (q) (see Figure 10).
Note that gε is not necessarily smooth, however, it is smooth up to a conformal factor
and this is sufficient for our purposes.
  Thanks to Corollary 5.18, there exists a Γ-equivariant map fε ∈ W 1,2 (M, Sn ), for
some n independent of ε (a priori n depends on [gε ], but the dependence on ε can be
                                                                      1244–38




                                              (M ′ , g ′ )                            Dε (p)
                                                                                                              Cε
                           τ

                                                                                      Dε (q)




                                                                          (M, gε )

               Figure 10. The surface (M, gε ) is obtained from (M ′ , g ′ ) by gluing in a flat
               cylinder. In the equivariant case, this operation has to be done equivariantly
               and may involve gluing multiple necks. For simplicity, we discuss only the case
               in which one neck is added.

removed, cf. Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern, 2025), such that
                               
(18)                                   |dfε |2 dvgε ≤ ΛΓ1 (M, [gε ]) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M ′ ) = λ1 (M ′ , g ′ )
                                   M

and
                                                             
(19)                                                                  fˆε dvg′ = 0,
                                                                 M′

where fˆε : M ′ → Rn+1 is obtained by fε : M → Sn by harmonic extension on Dε (p), Dε (q).
More precisely, the map fˆε is defined as
                               
                                 f
                                ε
                               
                               
                                                                                      on M ′ \ Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)
                       fˆε := harmonic extension of fε |∂Dε (p)                       on Dε (p)
                               
                               harmonic extension of f |
                               
                                                                                       on Dε (q).
                                                                         ε ∂Dε (q)
                                                                                                
Note that we applied Corollary 5.18 on (M, gε ) with T (f ) =                                       M′
                                                                                                         fˆ dvg′ .
                                                 (18)
       1 : In the regime when ε → 0, we have
   Step
    –    |dfˆε |2 dvg′ = λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) + o(1);
               M′
           
       –            |1 − |fˆε |2 | dvg′ = o(1);
               M′


       –                 fˆε dvg′ −                fˆε dvg′ = o(1).
               ∂Dε (p)                   ∂Dε (q)



(18)
                               
  Here, the symbol denotes the average integral, that is the integral divided by the measure of the
domain of integration.
                                                                  1244–39


Let us now sketch the proof of these estimates. First note that we decided to impose (19)
in order to have a test function for λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ). Indeed, we get
                                                                                   
                                             |dfˆε |2 dvg′ ≥ λ1 (M ′ , g ′ )                 |fˆε |2 dvg′ .
                                        M′                                              M′

Moreover, since |fε | ≡ 1 and fˆε is either equal to fε or to its harmonic extension inside
Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q), we have |fˆε | ≤ 1 and hence
                                                       
                           |1 − |fˆε |2 | dvg′ =                         |1 − |fˆε |2 | dvg′ = O(ε2 ) = o(1).
                      M′                                 Dε (p)∪Dε (q)

Combining this with the previous equation gives
                                         
                                                  |dfˆε |2 dvg′ ≥ λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) + o(1).
                                             M′

    Now observe that
                                            
(20)                     |dfˆε |2 dvg′ =             |dfε |2 dvgε + ∥dfˆε ∥2L2 (Dε (p)∪Dε (q)) − ∥dfε ∥2L2 (Cε ) .
                    M′                           M

The choice of fˆε as the harmonic extension of fε in the removed disks has been done in
order to being able to estimate it well in terms of fε . Thanks to (KKMS, Lemma 8.11,
applied with L = 2 > 32 ln(2)), we indeed get

(21)                           ∥dfˆε ∥2L2 (Dε (p)∪Dε (q)) − ∥dfε ∥2L2 (Cε ) ≤ C∥dfε ∥2L2 (Cε ) ,

for some universal constant C > 0. Moreover, using the assumption ΛΓ1 (M ) ≤ ΛΓ1 (M ′ ),
it is possible to estimate the Dirichlet energy of fε on the neck Cε as follows.

Lemma 6.8. — There exists C > 0 such that
                                                            ∥dfε ∥2L2 (Cε ) ≤ Cε2 .

Proof of the lemma. — Using |fˆε | ≤ 1 together with (19), we have that

                                                 Aε :=                                fˆε dvg′
                                                               M ′ \(Dε (p)∪Dε (q))

is of order ε2 . Therefore, using fˆε − Aε as test function in the variational characteriza-
                                                   ′                     ′
tion (7) of the first Neumann eigenvalue λN   1 (M \ (Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)), g ), we get
                                            
                               2
                         |dfε | dvgε =                                  |dfˆε |2 dvg′
    M \(Dε (p)∪Dε (q))                           M ′ \(Dε (p)∪Dε (q))
                                                                              
                           ≥ λN   ′                      ′
                              1 (M \ (Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)), g )                                               |fˆε − Aε |2 dvg′
                                                                                  M ′ \(Dε (p)∪Dε (q))
                                  ′                      ′         ′                      ′
                           ≥ λN                                                                  2
                              1 (M \ (Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)), g ) (area(M \ (Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)), g ) − Cε )

                           ≥ (λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) − Cε2 )(area(M ′ , g ′ ) − Cε2 ) ≥ λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) − Cε2 ,
                                                                    1244–40


                                   ′                             ′           ′ ′
where we used that λN                                                                  2
                              1 (M \ (Dε (p) ∪ Dε (q)), g ) ≥ λ1 (M , g ) − Cε by (Matthiesen
and Siffert, 2019, Theorem 5.1). Combining this inequality with (18) and the fact that
∥dfε ∥2L2 (Cε ) = ∥dfε ∥2L2 (M ) − ∥dfε ∥2L2 (M \(Dε (p)∪Dε (q))) , we get the desired result.


Remark 6.9. — The estimate in Lemma 6.8 is stronger than the one used in (KKMS, see
Lemma 8.13 therein), and simplifies some of the arguments. It was used in (Karpukhin,
Petrides, and Stern, 2025, see (4.9) in their paper), but the proof presented there is differ-
ent, uses a different definition of fˆε , and is not always possible in the equivariant setting.
However, as explained by Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern in personal communication,
the proof sketched above does work in the equivariant setting.
   Using this better estimate in place of the one in (KKMS, Lemma 8.13), it is possible
to fix the length of the neck L = 2, instead of having to take it going to ∞ as ε → 0
(see KKMS, p. 113).

  Therefore, Lemma 6.8 together with (20) and (21) gives
                                                      
                                    |dfˆε |2 dvg′ ≤            |dfε |2 dvgε + Cε2 ≤ λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) + o(1).
                               M′                          M

Combining this with the reverse inequality (18) obtained earlier, we thus get
                                             
                                                      |dfˆε |2 dvg′ = λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) + o(1).
                                                 M′

  Finally, the last point in the statement of Step 1 follows by

                           fˆε dvg′ −                  fˆε dvg′ =                 fε dvg′ −             fε dvg′
                 ∂Dε (p)                    ∂Dε (q)                     ∂Dε (p)               ∂Dε (q)
                                              1
                                            ≤ ∥dfε ∥L2 (Cε ) area(Cε )1/2 ≤ Cε2 = o(1).
                                              ε
   Step 2 : Define a map vε : M ′ → Rn+1 to be the projection of fˆε onto the space of
λ1 (M ′, g ′ )-eigenfunctions. Then vε also has the properties of Step 1, namely
    –            |dvε |2 dvg′ = λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) + o(1);
            M′
        
    –            |1 − |vε |2 | dvg′ = o(1);
            M′


    –                 vε dvg′ −                   vε dvg′ = o(1).
            ∂Dε (p)                     ∂Dε (q)


This step is useful to have nice convergence properties of the maps vε as ε → 0 and
obtain in the limit a map by first eigenfunctions, as described in Step 3 below. The idea
to prove this is to write fˆε = vε + Rε and prove that ∥Rε ∥2W 1,2 (M ′ ) ≤ Cε. Observe that
this estimate is better than the one in (KKMS, (8.16)) thanks to our use of Lemma 6.8
in place of (KKMS, Lemma 8.13).
                                         1244–41


  Step 3 : Since the maps vε are uniformly bounded in W 1,2 (M ′ , g ′ ) and their compo-
nents are first eigenfunctions, we can extract a subsequence converging smoothly to a
map v : M ′ → Sn by first eigenfunctions. Moreover, we have that
                                                                                !
                v(p) − v(q) = lim               vε dvg′ −             vε dvg′       = 0.
                               ε→0
                                      ∂Dε (p)               ∂Dε (q)

Now recall that (M ′ , g ′ ) maximizes λ1 among Γ-equivariant metrics. Therefore, by
Theorem 4.8, the multiplicity of λ1 (M ′ , g ′ ) is 4 and there exists a minimal embedding
u : (M ′ , g ′ ) → S3 . As a result, if genus(M ′ ) ̸= 1, applying Proposition 4.10 we get a
contradiction to the fact that v(p) = v(q) for p ̸= q, proving ΛΓ1 (M ′ ) < ΛΓ1 (M ). The
inequality when M ′ has genus one is showed separately in (KKMS, p. 103), using that
the only genus one minimal surface in S3 is the Clifford torus. This concludes the
proof.

Proof of Theorem A. — Thanks to Theorems 6.1 and 4.8, for every Γ-equivariant basic
reflection surface (M, τ ) there exists a minimal embedding u : M → S3 by first Laplace
eigenfunctions, with area less than 8π, and which is a doubling of an equatorial sphere.
Applying this for different actions of the group Γ = Z2 × Z2 on a surfaces M with
genus γ gives ⌊ γ−1
                  4
                    ⌋ + 1 such embeddings which are nonisometric (see Section 4.2). For
the proof of this final statement see (KKMS, Proposition 8.8).


6.3. Maximizing metric without symmetries
  The ideas introduced by KKMS to prove the strict inequality (17) in the equivariant
setting have also turned out to be very useful for proving the existence of maximizing
metrics on closed surface in the case without symmetries, as stated in Theorem C.
However, since Proposition 4.10 is no longer available in the nonequivariant setting, a
more careful analysis is necessary. In particular, note that:
   – Petrides (2024, Theorem 0.1) proves the result for orientable surfaces. The paper
uses some ideas from KKMS but is based on an approach via Ekeland’s variational
principle from (Petrides, 2025). The idea is to find a maximizing sequence of metrics and
associated maps by first eigenfunctions that are almost harmonic and almost conformal.
Then, the existence of a maximizer follows by performing a careful analysis of the limit
of the sequence of metrics and maps. The method is very robust: it works for higher
eigenvalues (under suitable assumptions), and its application to the equivariant setting
might cover more general group actions than KKMS, e.g. the ones missing in the Steklov
case as described in Remark 6.2.
   – Karpukhin, Petrides, and Stern (2025, Theorem 1.2) cover both the orientable
and nonorientable cases with a proof along the lines of KKMS. The proof works only
for the first eigenvalue, but it is shorter and simpler, once one knows the min-max
characterization of conformal eigenvalues discussed in Section 5. In order to bypass
Proposition 4.10, it is necessary to attach the cylinder Cε to M ′ more carefully (with a
                                         1244–42


twist), in order to define a metric gε on M . Moreover, one needs to define the map fˆε
more carefully.
Remark 6.10. — For the kth eigenvalue with k ≥ 2, it is not true in general that there
is a metric maximizing it which is smooth away from finitely many conical singularities.
See (Karpukhin, Nadirashvili, Penskoi, and Polterovich, 2021), which also contains a
nice survey of results about higher eigenvalues.
Remark 6.11. — The existence of a maximizing metric for the first renormalized Steklov
eigenvalue is still open in general. However, KKMS proves the result for some topologies
(see e.g. Corollary 1.11 therein), and it is expected that the methods described in this
section will soon lead to a proof the general result.


Acknowledgments. I would like to thank M. Karpukhin, R. Petrides and D. Stern
for the interesting conversations and their detailed answers to my questions, S. Lynch
for valuable comments that greatly helped improve the exposition, and N. Bourbaki for
the precious detailed feedback on an earlier version of the text. I also thank G. Besson,
L. Hauswirth, R. Kusner, I. Mondello, P. Laurain, R. Souam and all my colleagues at
LAMA and IMJ-PRG for their help and support during the preparation of this exposé.


Abbreviations

KKMS Mikhail Karpukhin, Robert Kusner, Peter McGrath, and Daniel Stern (2024).
     “Embedded minimal surfaces in S3 and B3 via equivariant eigenvalue optimiza-
     tion”, preprint. arXiv: 2402.13121 [math.DG].


References

Frederick J. Almgren Jr. (1966). “Some interior regularity theorems for minimal surfaces
  and an extension of Bernstein’s theorem”, Ann. of Math. (2) 84, pp. 277–292.
Antonio Ambrosetti and Andrea Malchiodi (2007). Nonlinear analysis and semilinear
  elliptic problems. Vol. 104. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge
  University Press, Cambridge, pp. xii+316.
Simon Brendle (2013a). “Embedded minimal tori in S 3 and the Lawson conjecture”,
  Acta Math. 211 (2), pp. 177–190.
         (2013b). “Minimal surfaces in S 3 : a survey of recent results”, Bull. Math. Sci. 3
  (1), pp. 133–171.
Gilles Carron (2016). “De nouvelles utilisations du principe du maximum en géométrie
  [d’après B. Andrews, S. Brendle, J. Clutterbuck]”, in: Séminaire Bourbaki, Volume
  2014/2015, Astérisque, no. 380 (2016), Exposé No. 1094, 171–206.
                                       1244–43


Isaac Chavel (1984). Eigenvalues in Riemannian geometry. Vol. 115. Pure and Applied
   Mathematics. Including a chapter by Burton Randol, With an appendix by Jozef
   Dodziuk. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL, pp. xiv+362.
Yun Mei Chen (1989). “The weak solutions to the evolution problems of harmonic
   maps”, Math. Z. 201 (1), pp. 69–74.
Yun Mei Chen and Michael Struwe (1989). “Existence and partial regularity results for
   the heat flow for harmonic maps”, Math. Z. 201 (1), pp. 83–103.
Jaigyoung Choe and Marc Soret (2009). “First eigenvalue of symmetric minimal surfaces
   in S3 ”, Indiana Univ. Math. J. 58 (1), pp. 269–281.
Hyeong In Choi and Richard Schoen (1985). “The space of minimal embeddings of a
   surface into a three-dimensional manifold of positive Ricci curvature”, Invent. Math.
   81 (3), pp. 387–394.
Adrian Chun-Pong Chu and Daniel Stern (2025). “Minimal surface doublings and
   electrostatics for Schrödinger operators”, preprint. arXiv: 2509.18630 [math.DG].
Bruno Colbois, Alexandre Girouard, Carolyn Gordon, and David Sher (2024). “Some
   recent developments on the Steklov eigenvalue problem”, Rev. Mat. Complut. 37 (1),
   pp. 1–161.
Tobias Holck Colding and William P. Minicozzi II (2011). A course in minimal sur-
   faces. Vol. 121. Graduate Studies in Mathematics. American Mathematical Society,
   Providence, RI, pp. xii+313.
Camillo De Lellis and Filippo Pellandini (2010). “Genus bounds for minimal surfaces
   arising from min-max constructions”, J. Reine Angew. Math. 644, pp. 47–99.
Ahmad El Soufi, Hector Giacomini, and Mustapha Jazar (2006). “A unique extremal
   metric for the least eigenvalue of the Laplacian on the Klein bottle”, Duke Math. J.
  135 (1), pp. 181–202.
Ahmad El Soufi and Saïd Ilias (2000). “Riemannian manifolds admitting isometric
   immersions by their first eigenfunctions”, Pacific J. Math. 195 (1), pp. 91–99.
Georg Faber (1923). “Beweis, daß unter allen homogenen Membranen von gleicher Fläche
   und gleicher Spannung die kreisförmige den tiefsten Grundton gibt”, Sitzungsber.-
  Bayer. Akad. Wiss., Math.-Phys. Munich., pp. 169–172.
Isabel Fernández, Laurent Hauswirth, and Pablo Mira (2023). “Free boundary minimal
   annuli immersed in the unit ball”, Arch. Ration. Mech. Anal. 247 (6), Paper No. 108,
  44.
Abigail Folha, Frank Pacard, and Tatiana Zolotareva (2017). “Free boundary minimal
   surfaces in the unit 3-ball”, Manuscripta Math. 154 (3-4), pp. 359–409.
Giada Franz and Mario B. Schulz (2023). “Topological control for min-max free boundary
   minimal surfaces”, preprint. arXiv: 2307.00941 [math.DG].
Ailana Fraser and Martin Man-chun Li (2014). “Compactness of the space of embed-
   ded minimal surfaces with free boundary in three-manifolds with nonnegative Ricci
   curvature and convex boundary”, J. Differential Geom. 96 (2), pp. 183–200.
                                        1244–44


Ailana Fraser and Richard Schoen (2011). “The first Steklov eigenvalue, conformal
  geometry, and minimal surfaces”, Adv. Math. 226 (5), pp. 4011–4030.
         (2013). “Minimal surfaces and eigenvalue problems”, Geometric analysis, math-
  ematical relativity, and nonlinear partial differential equations, Contemp. Math. 599,
  pp. 105–121.
         (2016). “Sharp eigenvalue bounds and minimal surfaces in the ball”, Invent.
  Math. 203 (3), pp. 823–890.
David Gilbarg and Neil S. Trudinger (2001). Elliptic partial differential equations of
  second order. Classics in Mathematics. Reprint of the 1998 edition. Springer-Verlag,
  Berlin, pp. xiv+517.
Alexandre Girouard and Jean Lagacé (2021). “Large Steklov eigenvalues via homogeni-
  sation on manifolds”, Invent. Math. 226 (3), pp. 1011–1056.
Alexandre Girouard and Iosif Polterovich (2017). “Spectral geometry of the Steklov
  problem (survey article)”, J. Spectr. Theory 7 (2), pp. 321–359.
Robert D. Gulliver II, Robert Osserman, and Halsey L. Royden (1973). “A theory of
  branched immersions of surfaces”, Amer. J. Math. 95, pp. 750–812.
Joseph Hersch (1970). “Quatre propriétés isopérimétriques de membranes sphériques
  homogènes”, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. A-B 270, A1645–A1648.
Nikolaos Kapouleas (2017). “Minimal surfaces in the round three-sphere by doubling
  the equatorial two-sphere, I”, J. Differential Geom. 106 (3), pp. 393–449.
Nikolaos Kapouleas and Martin Man-chun Li (2021). “Free boundary minimal surfaces
  in the unit three-ball via desingularization of the critical catenoid and the equatorial
  disc”, J. Reine Angew. Math. 776, pp. 201–254.
Nikolaos Kapouleas and Peter McGrath (2019). “Minimal surfaces in the round three-
  sphere by doubling the equatorial two-sphere, II”, Comm. Pure Appl. Math. 72 (10),
  pp. 2121–2195.
         (2022). “Free boundary minimal annuli ommersed in the unit 3-ball”, preprint.
  arXiv: 2212.09680 [math.DG].
         (2023). “Generalizing the linearized doubling approach, I: General theory and
  new minimal surfaces and self-shrinkers”, Camb. J. Math. 11 (2), pp. 299–439.
         (2024). “New minimal surface doublings of the Clifford torus and contributions
  to questions of Yau”, preprint. arXiv: 2411.00613 [math.DG].
Nikolaos Kapouleas and David Wiygul (2020). “The index and nullity of the Lawson
  surfaces ξg,1 ”, Camb. J. Math. 8 (2), pp. 363–405.
         (2022). “The Lawson surfaces are determined by their symmetries and topology”,
  J. Reine Angew. Math. 786, pp. 155–173.
Nikolaos Kapouleas and Seong-Deog Yang (2010). “Minimal surfaces in the three-sphere
  by doubling the Clifford torus”, Amer. J. Math. 132 (2), pp. 257–295.
Hermann Karcher, Ulrich Pinkall, and Ivan Sterling (1988). “New minimal surfaces in
  S 3 ”, J. Differential Geom. 28 (2), pp. 169–185.
                                        1244–45


Mikhail Karpukhin, Robert Kusner, Peter McGrath, and Daniel Stern (2024). “Embed-
  ded minimal surfaces in S3 and B3 via equivariant eigenvalue optimization”, preprint.
  arXiv: 2402.13121 [math.DG].
Mikhail Karpukhin, Peter McGrath, and Daniel Stern (2025). “Large topology asymp-
  totics for spectrally extremal minimal surfaces in B3 and S3 ”, preprint. arXiv: 2502.
  10225 [math.DG].
Mikhail Karpukhin and Antoine Métras (2022). “Laplace and Steklov extremal metrics
  via n-harmonic maps”, J. Geom. Anal. 32 (5), Paper No. 154, 36.
Mikhail Karpukhin, Nikolai Nadirashvili, Alexei V. Penskoi, and Iosif Polterovich (2021).
  “An isoperimetric inequality for Laplace eigenvalues on the sphere”, J. Differential
  Geom. 118 (2), pp. 313–333.
Mikhail Karpukhin, Mickaël Nahon, Iosif Polterovich, and Daniel Stern (2025). “Stability
  of isoperimetric inequalities for Laplace eigenvalues on surfaces”, J. Differential Geom.
  129 (2), pp. 415–490.
Mikhail Karpukhin, Romain Petrides, and Daniel Stern (2025). “Existence of metrics
  maximizing the first Laplace eigenvalue on closed surfaces”, preprint. arXiv: 2505.
  05293 [math.DG].
Mikhail Karpukhin and Daniel Stern (2024a). “Existence of harmonic maps and eigen-
  value optimization in higher dimensions”, Invent. Math. 236 (2), pp. 713–778.
        (2024b). “From Steklov to Laplace: free boundary minimal surfaces with many
  boundary components”, Duke Math. J. 173 (8), pp. 1557–1629.
        (2024c). “Min-max harmonic maps and a new characterization of conformal
  eigenvalues”, J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS) 26 (11), pp. 4071–4129.
Daniel Ketover (2016). “Equivariant min-max theory”, preprint. arXiv: 1612.08692
  [math.DG].
        (2022). “Flipping Heegaard splittings and minimal surfaces”, preprint. arXiv:
  2211.03745 [math.DG].
Gerasim Kokarev (2014). “Variational aspects of Laplace eigenvalues on Riemannian
  surfaces”, Adv. Math. 258, pp. 191–239.
Nicholas Korevaar (1993). “Upper bounds for eigenvalues of conformal metrics”, J.
  Differential Geom. 37 (1), pp. 73–93.
Edgar Krahn (1925). “Über eine von Rayleigh formulierte Minimaleigenschaft des
  Kreises”, Math. Ann. 94 (1), pp. 97–100.
Robert Kusner (1989). “Comparison surfaces for the Willmore problem”, Pacific J.
  Math. 138 (2), pp. 317–345.
Robert Kusner and Peter McGrath (2024). “On Steklov eigenspaces for free boundary
  minimal surfaces in the unit ball”, Amer. J. Math. 146 (5), pp. 1275–1293.
H. Blaine Lawson Jr. (1969). “Local rigidity theorems for minimal hypersurfaces”, Ann.
  of Math. (2) 89, pp. 187–197.
        (1970). “The unknottedness of minimal embeddings”, Inventiones Math. 11,
  pp. 183–87.
                                       1244–46


Martin Man-chun Li (2020). “Free boundary minimal surfaces in the unit ball: recent
  advances and open questions”. In: Proceedings of the International Consortium of
  Chinese Mathematicians 2017. Int. Press, Boston, MA, pp. 401–435.
Peter Li and Shing Tung Yau (1982). “A new conformal invariant and its applications to
  the Willmore conjecture and the first eigenvalue of compact surfaces”, Invent. Math.
  69 (2), pp. 269–291.
Fernando C. Marques and André Neves (2014). “Min-max theory and the Willmore
  conjecture”, Ann. of Math. (2) 179 (2), pp. 683–782.
Henrik Matthiesen and Anna Siffert (2019). “Handle attachment and the normalized
  first eigenvalue”, preprint. arXiv: 1909.03105 [math.DG].
William Meeks III, Leon Simon, and Shing Tung Yau (1982). “Embedded minimal
  surfaces, exotic spheres, and manifolds with positive Ricci curvature”, Ann. of Math.
  (2) 116 (3), pp. 621–659.
Sebastián Montiel and Antonio Ros (1986). “Minimal immersions of surfaces by the first
  eigenfunctions and conformal area”, Invent. Math. 83 (1), pp. 153–166.
Nikolai Nadirashvili (1996). “Berger’s isoperimetric problem and minimal immersions
  of surfaces”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 6 (5), pp. 877–897.
Shin Nayatani and Toshihiro Shoda (2019). “Metrics on a closed surface of genus two
  which maximize the first eigenvalue of the Laplacian”, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris
  357 (1), pp. 84–98.
Johannes C. C. Nitsche (1985). “Stationary partitioning of convex bodies”, Arch. Ra-
  tional Mech. Anal. 89 (1), pp. 1–19.
Richard S. Palais (1979). “The principle of symmetric criticality”, Comm. Math. Phys.
  69 (1), pp. 19–30.
Romain Petrides (2014). “Existence and regularity of maximal metrics for the first
  Laplace eigenvalue on surfaces”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 24 (4), pp. 1336–1376.
        (2023a). “Laplace eigenvalues and non-planar minimal spheres into 3-dimensional
  ellipsoids”, preprint. arXiv: 2304.12119 [math.DG].
         (2023b). “Non planar free boundary minimal disks into ellipsoids”, preprint.
  arXiv: 2304.12111 [math.DG].
         (2024). “Geometric spectral optimization on surfaces”, preprint. arXiv: 2410.
  13347 [math.DG].
         (2025). “A variational method for functionals depending on eigenvalues”, J.
  Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 112 (4), Paper No. e70315.
         (2026). “Problèmes variationnels en géométrie spectrale et applications”. Mé-
  moire d’habilitation à diriger des recherches, to appear.
Tristan Rivière (2015). “Méthodes de min-max et la conjecture de Willmore (d’après
  F. C. Marques et A. Neves)”, in: Séminaire Bourbaki, Volume 2010/2011, Astérisque,
  no. 367-368 (2012), Exp. No. 1080, viii, 179–217.
Jonathan Sacks and Karen Uhlenbeck (1981). “The existence of minimal immersions of
  2-spheres”, Ann. of Math. (2) 113 (1), pp. 1–24.
                                        1244–47


Mario B. Schulz (2025). Geometric analysis gallery. URL: mbschulz.github.io. Last
  visited on 2025/10/24.
Michael Struwe (2008). Variational methods, Applications to nonlinear partial differential
  equations and Hamiltonian systems. Fourth edition. Vol. 34. Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb.
  (3), 34. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. xx+302.
Gábor Szegö (1954). “Inequalities for certain eigenvalues of a membrane of given area”,
  J. Rational Mech. Anal. 3, pp. 343–356.
Tsunero Takahashi (1966). “Minimal immersions of Riemannian manifolds”, J. Math.
  Soc. Japan 18, pp. 380–385.
Denis Vinokurov (2025). “Maximizing higher eigenvalues in dimensions three and above”,
  preprint. arXiv: 2506.09328 [math.DG].
Robert Weinstock (1954). “Inequalities for a classical eigenvalue problem”, J. Rational
  Mech. Anal. 3, pp. 745–753.
Brian White (2016). “Introduction to minimal surface theory”, IAS/Park City Math.
  Ser. 22, pp. 387–438.
Paul C. Yang and Shing Tung Yau (1980). “Eigenvalues of the Laplacian of compact
  Riemann surfaces and minimal submanifolds”, Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa Cl. Sci.
  (4) 7 (1), pp. 55–63.



                                           Giada Franz
                                           CNRS and LAMA, Université Gustave Eiffel
                                           5 boulevard Descartes
                                           77420 Champs-sur-Marne, France
                                           E-mail : giada.franz@cnrs.fr
