- Good afternoon. I'm Dan Freed. It's a pleasure to welcome everybody, both here and online, to the second of the seven
Millennium Prize lectures. This is a series of lectures that's being put on this academic year by the Department of Mathematics here at the Harvard Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, and also the Clay Mathematics Institute. So I'm not going to give
a long introduction. You can read more in this
pamphlet that's available. So today, we're very happy to have Sourav Chatterjee from Stanford talking about Yang-Mill's
existence and mass gap. - Thank you, Dan. Yep. Okay, so I thank the
organizers for inviting me. It's a great honor. I'm going to talk about
what this problem is, and one hour is actually
not enough to explain that, but I'll try my best, okay? And of course, I'll leave
out a lot of things, but I'll try my best to tell you what is the mathematical
formulation of this problem and what is the physics behind
it, both of those things. Okay. So I'll start from very basics. So what is Lagrangian mechanics? You look at the trajectory
of a physical system, and an action is assigned to a trajectory. So, for example, if you
have a single particle of mass M moving in a
potential V through time, okay? So the trajectory is a map from R to R3, and the action is formally
defined as integral. So you take the kinetic energy
minus the potential energy, not plus, where the kinetic energy minus the potential energy, and you integrate it over all time, okay? That is formally the
action of this trajectory. And what Lagrangian mechanics tells you is that for any classical system, the classical trajectory of the system should be a critical point
of this action, okay? Something that minimizes the action, but more generally, something that's a critical
point of this action. So if you do a variational
derivative, you get zero. So you just shift the action
a little bit, you get zero. And for this system, the critical equation is M times the second
time derivative of gamma equals minus the gradient of V at gamma T. So this is the usual equation of motion from Newtonian mechanics, okay? So you covered the equation by looking at the critical
points of the action, okay? So now, in the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics, we shift from deterministic
to random trajectories. And instead of trying to
calculate the exact value of some supposedly one, some real-valued function
of the trajectory, okay? Where the trajectory is at
some given point of time, or some other function of
the trajectory instead of, so in the classical case, you
actually had the trajectory in your hands in case there's
a unique critical point, and you can talk about the exact value of the function of the trajectory. Here, we look at the expected value. So there is, you know, it's not deterministic. You try to compute the
expected value of the function. So heuristically, the
path integral formulation says that this expected value, and, again, I'm brushing a
lot of things under the rug. This is what's called the
vacuum expectation value, and there's a lot of things going on, but let me just make it simple. The expectation value of this
function of the trajectory is this ratio where the numerator is, you take the function F of gamma, you take E to the I over H, where I is square root of minus 1, and H is Planck's constant,
S(gamma), D(gamma). And the denominator is the same, except that you don't have the F. And this D(gamma) means that you integrate over all possible trajectories. So that's the path integral. We integrate over all
possible trajectories, and this is often not
mathematically well-defined, okay? So this is the hard part, to how to make sense of this. And there are various things
that are difficult here. One is this integration of
the space of all trajectories. The second is that it's not
even a probability measure. So you have this oscillatory thing, E to the I over h-bar S(gamma). Okay. So this is what you have
to make sense of, right? So now, how do you go
from quantum to classical? Let's quickly see the intuition. So when you apply the
path integral formulation, the classical word, this h-bar is tiny. It's a tiny, tiny number, which means that this E
to the I over H S(gamma) will have huge fluctuations, even if you move slightly away from the critical point, okay? And this fluctuations are
supposed to cancel out. And so again, the primary
contribution of the path integral will come, to both in
numerator and denominator, will come from small neighborhoods
of the critical point. So in particular, if, let's say, if there's a
unique critical point gamma hat, then you may expect that if h-bar is tiny, the expected value of F(gamma) would be close to F of gamma hat. And in many cases, you
can actually justify this in many situations. Okay, so that's the correspondence, and that's why we don't
see quantum effects in our classical world, because you're in setting
where h-bar is tiny. And so you are basically, instead of look, you don't really see
the random fluctuations. You always see the
deterministic, you know, the critical point of
the trajectory, okay? Okay, so the next thing, so we'll remember this, and we'll come back to it in a minute. Let's talk about Maxwell's
equations in the vacuum. So an electromagnetic field consists of an electric field
E and a magnetic field B. And what this means is that
at each point of time, T, and at each point of space, X, we have a vector, three vector, E(t,x), and a three vector, B (t,x). So there's an electric
field, a magnetic field, and there's real objects. All of us has have done
experiments in school where we trace the magnetic fields, okay? Of a magnet, and maybe not
electric fields so much. But what, oh, sorry, what Maxwell's equations
tell us that in the vacuum, if you don't have matter, this E and B should obey
these equations, okay? So the divergence of E
and the divergence of B should both be zero,
where the divergence means that divergence in the space coordinate, and the curl of E and the curl of B should be related to the
time derivatives of B and E via these equations, where
C is the speed of time. Uh, speed of light, okay? So these are four equations
that are obeyed by, should be obeyed by, and
that was experimentally seen. And as you can see, many people contributed
to these equations, and they're collectively called Maxwell's equations for
the electromagnetic field. So now, so just to simplify, things will work in units
where the Planck's constant and speed of light are both equal to one. So you can show that units
can be fixed to ensure that. Now, the question is, can we
obtain Maxwell's equations as the equation for the
critical point of an action? So just as Newton's equations
were obtained in that manner, can we obtain also Maxwell's equations as a critical point for
some action on some, space of trajectories
for some system, okay? So the answer is yes, but the procedure is a bit complicated. So let me tell you what this is. So first, we introduce an
abstract on physical object called a gauge field, which is is a map from R4 to iR to the 4. I mean, physics would say just R4 to R4, but for certain reasons, I'll keep the iR. It's because of the convention of what we call the Lie algebra. So sometimes, it differs. Okay, I'll come to that. So at each point in space time, you have a full couple
of imaginary numbers. And let us write this
as the first coordinate. Let us write as minus I-phi. And the second coordinate
is I times bold A, where phi is a now a real-valued map, and bold A is a R3-valued map. And then this gauge field gives rise to an
electromagnetic field pair, E and B, through these equations. So there is this gauge field, which is an abstract object. It's not a real object that
you can measure in experiments, and gives rise to this pair, electric and magnetic fields, which you can actually
observe in experiments. The reason why A is unphysical is because the correspondence between A and the pair E,B is not one-to-one. And that's sort of a deep thing. It's this whole gauge symmetry thing and we'll not have time
to cover it in the talk, but it's not a one-to-one correspondence. So there are many different gauge fields which correspond to a
single E,B pair, okay? Right? So you have this correspondence. And we define the action
for the gauge field. Instead of the pair E,B, we define the action of the gauge field. So henceforth, we'll
index the element of R4 as X0, X1, X2, X3, where X0
will denote the time coordinate. And we define the action
of the gauge field A, where A0, A1, A2, A3 are
the four coordinates of A, as this minus 1 over 2G 0-squared, where G0 is subparameter. It's known as the coupling constant, times the integral over R4 of the sum overall I J distinct, and eta-I, eta-J, so that's the main, of course, key signature. Eta-0 is 1, eta-1, eta-2,
and eta-3 are minus one of dell-I AJ(x) minus
dell-J AI(x) whole squared, and then dx, okay? So, okay, so if A is a smooth field, this is some number you can define. Hopefully, it'll be finite,
but we don't really, we are not really concerned about whether this is finite or not. We'll be interested in the
critical points of this. So whether a small shift, a compactly supported shift doesn't result in an
increase or decrease, okay? So it turns out that you can prove that A is a critical point of S, if and only if the pair E,B obtained from A solves
Maxwell's equations, okay? So that's, you know, in that sense, this is
the correct formulation of this Maxwell theory in terms of Lagrangian mechanics, okay? So this was discovered by
Hermann Weyl in the 1920s, and there were contributions
from Minkowski and Hilbert and other people also. So, okay, so that's how you
get the Lagrangian mechanics for Maxwell's equation. Now, this still doesn't seem very natural. So Maxwell's equation seem
kind of quite arbitrary. You know, where are they coming from? Okay, this gives you a
Lagrangian formulation of that, but it's still not something that, you know, where is this coming from? So this action defined by Weyl allowed quantization of
the electromagnetic field, and this was very valuable. It eventually led to the development of quantum electrodynamics in the 1940s by to Tomonaga, Schwinger,
Feynman, and Dyson, which was a great achievement
of quantum field theory. In the 1950s, Yang and Mills, this was where Yang-Mills
theory comes from. They realized that this theory
generalizes very elegantly to allow quantization of two of the three remaining fundamental forces of nature, the strong force and the weak force. So there are these four
fundamental forces: electromagnetic force, the strong force, the weak force, and gravity. So you can actually put the
strong force and the weak force under the same umbrella by a very elegant
generalization of this theory for the electromagnetic
field that I just wrote down. So how do you go about doing that? So the first key realization
was that this gauge field that I wrote down, which is
a map from R4 to iR to the 4 can actually be seen as
a u(1)-valued 1-form. So where this u(1) is the Lie algebra of the group u(1), which is
just the imaginary axis, okay? So the physics would
say it's the real line, but in math, we say, it can say it's imaginary access. And so, in differential geometry notation, you write A as summation A J D X J. And so if you're not familiar with, or not comfortable
differential geometry notation, you can ignore this. But if you are, it's a
u(1)-valued 1-form on R4, okay? So now, what they realized, the second realization was that this term dell-I AJ minus dell-J AI that is appearing in Weyl's action is simply the curvature form. So FIJ, it's u(1)-value 2-form, and this is a curvature form
of the connection E, okay? So this, again, comes from
differential geometry. When you have this Lie
algebra-valued 1-form, you take its curvature form,
and this Lie algebra is U(1). You exactly get FIJ is dell-I
AJ minus dell-J AI, okay? So the final realization was that the theories for the weak
force and the strong force can be obtained simply by replacing u(1) by su(2) and su(3) respectively. So su(2) corresponds to the weak force and su(3) corresponds to the strong force, and just keep everything else the same. And the formula for F will change. The curvature form will change
if we do this replacement. I'll show it in the next slide. But that's that. So this gives you the, you know. I don't know why that is. If you replace this u(1) by su(2), you'll get the weak force and by su(3) you get the strong force. So here is a Yang-Mills action. Let this gothic g be
any matrix Lie algebra. and consider a theory
where the gauge field is a g-valued 1-form on R4. And then the curvature form is this FIJ, where FIJ is now generally given by dell-I AJ minus dell-J AI
plus the commutator of AI, AJ. So when you had A1, the
commutator just vanished. So we didn't have a commutator. In generally, we'll have
the commutator, okay? So okay, so let's see. These AIs are matrixes. So AI of X is a matrix
attached to the point X, okay? So these are matrices. So for example, for su(2) theory, these are two by two matrixes. And each FIJ is also a matrix, okay? So FIJ(x) is a matrix at the point X. And the Yang-Mills action has exactly the same form as before. It's minus 1 over 2G0-squared, integral over R4 eta-I,
summation eta-I, eta-J, trace of FIJ(x)-squared DX, okay? So it's exactly the same thing. You just generalize it
to these other groups, and you get this Yang-Mills action. Okay, so the Yang-Mill's
existence problem very roughly, and I'll come to a more precise version, of this question, is to do this. So, remember, we are taking
the Planck's constant to be 1 give a meaning to
expectation values like this. So when you take all Lie algebra-valued, give the Lie algebra, you
take all the algebra-valued 1-forms on R4, whatever that means, okay? You're not specifying the
smoothness or anything, and then you integrate over the space of Lie algebra followed 1-forms, integral of some function, whatever function you're interested in, function of this 1-form, E to the power I, S(A), where S is a Yang-Mills action, integrate that, and then you also divide by E to the I S(A) DA, okay? So this is the vacuum, what is called the vacuum
expectation value heuristically. And the question is to give
a meaning to this thing, and to do some calculations, and physics can do some
perturbative calculations and whatever you define, you should be able to
get those calculations out of your theory, okay? And as I said, I'll now discuss a more precise version of the question. So this is a very rough
version of the question. Everything clear so far? Okay. Okay, so let's see how we can make this a little bit more precise. There is a lot of thought
that has gone behind this. This has a long history, and many people have thought about this, and so the rough version that I showed you is not the most that we have gone so far. So I'll tell you what
are the developments. So suppose, now coming back to an abstract quantum mechanical system, so suppose you have a trajectory of a physical system taking
value in some space omega. So you have a trajectory gaba, which is a map from R into omega, and you have a time
trajectory of the system. And suppose you have the action
of such a trajectory, okay? So it often turns out,
heuristically at least, that if we, one, the expected
value of some function of gamma at some specific instant of time, then you can often write
it just as an integral of F with respect to some
probability measure mu on omega. So it's not clear why this is the case, and I don't have time to explain this, but you can often do this thing, that if you're just
looking at the function of the value of the trajectory
at a given instant of time, and this is a timing variant process, so it doesn't depend on what T it is. For any T, you'll get the same answer, and the answer would be
the integral of Fd (mu) for some probability measure
mu on this base omega. So that kind of thing can,
you can figure out, okay? So if this is the case, then
we take H to the L2 of this mu to be the Hilbert space
for our quantum system. So whenever you have
a probability measure, or any measure for that
matter, on some space, you take the L2 space of that, and that's a Hilbert space under
the natural linear product. And that is the Hilbert space. So if you have some familiarity
with quantum mechanics or even if not, you may have heard this in quantum mechanics,
the state of a system is an element of a Hilbert space, okay? So this will be our Hilbert space, okay? So how do we actually make
sense of path integrals? That's what I'm trying to get
at in the next few slides. So you have this Hilbert space. And elements of H represent
the possible states of the system at a given instant of time. Okay, so suppose we have
such a state space, L2(mu), then again, one can do another computation using path integrals. Suppose you take two functions,
F and G, in this L2 of mu, and take two time points, t1 and t2. And let's say we compute
the expected value of this two-point function. So you evaluate F at gamma(t1), where gamma(t1) is the
value of the trajectory, the location of the trajectory at time t1. And you evaluate G at location of the trajectory at time T2, and you take the product of
F gamma(t1) bar, G gamma(t2), and take the expected value
via the path integral. So you just write down the path integral, write down this thing. And again, it turns out that
this quantity often doesn't, just depends on the
difference T2 minus T2. And moreover, there is
actually a unitary operator from H into H so that this expectation can be written as the
inner product of U(t)G,F. So again, from the path integral, you can often come to this formulation. So there is this, you know, I'm just trying to give you a sense of how this path integrals
can be evaluated. And it's also usually true that this U(t) is a group of unitary
operators in the sense that U(s) plus t is U(s) times U(t) for any S and T in the real line, okay? So from this path integral
formulation, you can extract, and it's actually a
one-to-one correspondence. You can extract this group
of unitary operators, which act on this Hilbert space, okay? So that's the other version of, you know, so the path integral is one version, and then there is other
version of quantum mechanics where you have the system. It states are represented by
elements of the Hilbert space, and how the states evolve with time are described by the unitary operators. So I'm just telling you that
given this path integral, you can recover the unitary
operator from that, okay? And it also turns out conversely that if one can construct this group of unitary operators
on this Hilbert space, then one can give a meaning
to the expectation values defined using path integrals. So that's the other direction. So you can start from any
direction and go to the other one. So this path integral
expectations that I wrote down, if you know the Hilbert space, if you know the measure mu,
the probability measure mu, and then you have L2 of mu and then you have this whole group of unitary operators U(t)
acting on this L2(mu), if you know all of these, then
you can rigorously write down what the path integral is, okay? So the path integral looks very scary, but this is much more, as mathematicians, we will be much more
comfortable with this group of unitary operators
acting on a Hilbert space. So it's equivalent. You can construct these things
to get at the path integrals. Okay? So the constructive
field theory is a branch of mathematics developed
in the 1960s and '70s, starting with Wightman and Symanzik, Nelson, Glimm, Arthur here, and then continued by
Osterwalder and Schrader and many other contributors after that, that attempts to rigorously
construct this Hilbert space and this group of unitary operators for various quantum field
theories, including young males. So the constructive field theory, the goal is to construct
the quantum system in the sense that you want to
construct this Hilbert space and the group of unitary operators. So actually, again, I'm
brushing things on the carpet, It's not just U(t), so
that you have actually a representation of the
Poincare group and so on to be compatible with general relativity. But this is the starting
point that you construct, the Hilbert space and a
group of unitary operators that represent the quantum system. So to solve the Yang-Mills problem, you have to construct,
essentially, this Hilbert space, an appropriate Hilbert space, and an appropriate group
of unitary operators, okay? Which correspond to the path integrals that I displayed earlier. Okay, and then how do you know that you have constructed a good theory? So there are these widely
accepted set of rules, known as the Wightman axioms,
that describes the properties that the system should
have to be compatible with physical reality, compatible
with special relativity. So there are some properties
that it should have. Okay, so let me now come to the main technical tool that we have
in constructive field theory that was developed primarily
by Glimm and Jaffy. So let me just give you a very brief overview of how this goes. So suppose we have a group
of unitary operators, U(t), on a Hilbert space H, okay? And suppose that the group
is strongly continuous, meaning that for any x, the map T going to U(t)x is continuous. So it's a map from the real
line into the Hilbert space. And I'm saying for any x,
this map is continuous, okay? And the topology of the Hilbert space is the usual norm topology
on the Hilbert space. And under in this setting, there is a theorem from
functional analysis known as Stone's theorem, which says that there is
a self-adjoint operator H linear operator, from D
into the Hilbert space, where D is dense subspace
of the Hilbert space. So this is what's called a
density-defined operator. And I'm not going to the
definition of self-adjoint. It's a little complicated. There's a self-adjoint
operator such that U(t) is E to the minus itH, okay? So this H is called the
Hamiltonian for the system, so that you can, there is this one operator
that you can extract, which describes U(t) for all T. And whenever you have
a strongly continuous group of unitary operators,
you can find such an H. And conversely, given such an H, you can get a strongly continuous group of unitary operators. And there's the one-to-one correspondence. So constructing the
group of unitary operator is same as constructing this
self-adjoint operator H, okay? So the problem of constructing U(t) is equivalent to constructing
this Hamiltonian operator H. So how do you construct this Hamiltonian? So this is where we go back
to the path integral setting. So I'll, so let me explain that. So the key idea in constructive
field theory is as follows. So recall that we aim to define
H, which then generates U(t) as E to the minus itH by Stone's theorem. And also recall that H is L2(mu) for some probability measure
mu on the state space. Now, suppose we have a
stationary Markov process, Xt, with state space omega and
stationary distribution mu. So I'm going to probability language, and I'm just assuming that
you have some familiarity with Markov processes
and Markov chains, okay? So suppose you have a stationary Markov, stationary, actually, reversible. I forgot to mention that,
it's very important. Stationary reversible Markov process with state space omega and
stationary distribution mu, then this process defines
this Markov semi-group of symmetric linear operators, P(t), as these conditional expectations. P(t) F(x) is expectation of F(Xt) given X0 equals little x, okay? And this is a semi-group. This is defined only for T non-negative, and the semi group, because
P(s+t) is P(s) times P(t) for s and t non-negative,
not for all s and t, are just s and t non-negative. That's why it's a semi-group. And by this, another theorem
from functional analysis, if the semi-group is strongly continuous in the same sense as before, then there's a self-adjoint operator H, so that P(t) is E to the minus tH. Instead of E to the minus itH, you get E to the minus tH, okay? So the key idea underlying
this whole program, and it's not presented as such, but I'll tell you a little bit
about what's the difference, construct this Markov
process such that this H is the same as the H that we
want for our quantum system. So to build the quantum system, we just need this self-adjoint operator H. Somehow, we have to construct this. So the idea in constructive field theory is that instead of trying to
construct this path integral and this quantum system directly, what you do is you
construct a Markov process, which heuristically would
have the same generator in the same Hamilton, same H as the quantum system
that you want to construct. And then there is a nice way of describing what this Markov process is. So I'm not going into that, so I'll not say that in the slides, but I can tell you here, which is that, so you remember that E to
the I times the action? So how this Markov process is constructed is you replace this
action by Euclidean axiom by doing weak rotation. So there is a prescription for changing from the action of the quantum
system to a Euclidean axiom. And then instead of E to the I(s), you take E to the minus
S, the Euclidean axiom. So that gives you a probability measure. So now, the path integral has no I, okay? The E the minus S, it's
a non-negative thing, and that you can sometimes make sense of as a probability measure
on path space, okay? So for example, if you
take Brownian motion, one way to heuristically
describe Brownian motion is that it's, you know,
it's a probably measure. It's a random path with
this E to the minus integral F-prime x-squared. Sorry, this integral And so D, F, okay? So you look at all possible paths and then you have Lebesgue
measure, let's say, on the space of paths. And then you put a
weight in front of that. It's E to the minus
integral F prime X-squared. And if you do that, then heuristically, you get Brownian motion. You can make sense of that. Why is this Brownian motion? So there is a general prescription for how you construct this Markov process that gives you the same H, okay? Starting from the path integral. And this is what's called
Euclidean field theory. So this is how probability theory enters and you know my field
is probability theory, and that's why many people in probability are interested in this because
there is this connection. Okay, so this is formalized
in terms of what are called this Osterwalder-Schrader axioms. So for quantum field theory, the state space omega is usually a space of distributions on
some vector space, okay? So for example, for Yang-Mills theories, omega should be some space of Lie algebra valued distributional 1-forms. We don't expect the
g-valued 1-forms that arise in Yang-Mills theories to
be smooth 1-forms, okay? And not even a non-smooth, but functional 1-forms,
they will be distributional. So instead of A being defined pointwise, we can only talk about average values of A over regions of non-zero volume. So thus, we need to construct
a suitable Markov process on such a space of distributions, okay? And the Osterwalder-Schrader
axioms give a set of conditions under which one can construct a corresponding quantum
system starting with from. So what I don't mention here is that they have a different thing, which is called reflection positivity. And again, I don't have
time to explain that. So reflection positivity is a different condition which is
sufficient for recovering the quantum system from, so they construct this X(t) process, but you don't need to prove that it's a stationary
reversible Markov process. In Markovian, it is
usually difficult to prove. You just have to verify
this one condition called reflection positivity. And that will give you all
the ingredients that you need to reconstruct the Hamilton,
the H, and the Hilbert space. But the connection is from this. So it will be the fields
that you construct are basically always Markovian, stationary reversible
Markovian fields and, yeah, but you don't have to prove that. Okay, so that's the
Yang-Mill's existence question in a more mathematically
precise way, okay? Again, I cannot give you all the details, but instead of just saying that, "Okay, you makes sense
of these path integrals," which seems kind of impossible, here is all the thought
that has gone into it. How do you make sense
of these path integrals? And so what you do is, the constructive field theory prescription is that you construct these
Euclidean Yang-Mill's theories, which are probabilistic,
stochastic objects, and then you show that they
satisfy certain properties, if you can construct them, and I'll tell you what's the situation. If you can construct
them, and then you show that they satisfy this
Osterwalder-Schrader axioms, and that will allow you to reconstruct the quantum theory from that, okay? So that's the picture. Now, there is this other
part of the Clay problem, which is the mass gap. What is that about? So quantum system, you know, if you have H and a self-adjoint
Hamiltonian H, okay? It's said to have a mass gap, if there's a gap between the lowest and second lowest elements in the spectrum of the Hamiltonian. And the second part of the
Clay problem is to show, once you have constructed the theories to show that they have a mass gap. Certain theories. Not all theories will have a mass gap. So for example, su(3)
theory in four dimensions, that's the theory of the strong force, is supposed to have a mass gap, okay? If you can construct the
theory for the group SU(3) or the Lie algebra SU(3)
equivalently in four dimensions, and then you have constructed means that you have gotten your
hands on the Hamiltonian and you have gotten your
hands in the Hilbert space. And then you show that this Hamiltonian has a gap in the spectrum. So the reason for this nomenclature is that mass gap corresponds to particles in the theory having non-zero mass, and they don't have time to explain that. But just as a remark, for example, if you consider u(1) theory in
4D as your best u(3) theory, this is a theory of photons, okay? The particles in electromagnetism, if you don't have matter, the particles that
arise from just the free electromagnetic theory are photons, and photons don't have mass. So you don't expect this
theory to have a mass gap, and this doesn't have a mass gap. So on the probability side, if you consider this Markov
process that we talked about, this is what you need to show, that this Markov process
has a spectral gap, okay? But you can say it in
a different way also. So spectral gap means that X(t) and X(s) become exponentially, uncorrelated exponentially fast as the gap of T minus S increases. So this field that you have
constructed over space time should have exponential
degree of correlations. That's what you really have to show, okay? Okay, so what is the state of affairs in constructive field theory? So this theory was successfully used to construct number of
quantum field theories, such as free scalar
fields in all dimensions, phi-four theory, and 2D and 3D. These were big achievements
in constructive field theory. Yang-Mill's theories have been constructed in dimension two, okay? And a lot of different people
have contributed to that. And Abelian Yang-Mill's theories have been constructed in 2D,
3D, and 4D, pure Abelian. With the Higgs field,
it becomes difficult. So I'm not going into the
Higgs field at all here. However, what we don't have is that this is the main thrust
of the Clay problem. We don't have any
non-Abelian Yang-Mills theory in dimensions three and higher. So dimension four is
the most important case. But even in dimension three,
we don't have a construction of a non-Abelian Yang-Mills theory, or in fact, we don't have any interacting quantum field theory in
four dimensions, okay? So as you may know, just a few years ago, there was this big result
that phi-four theory in four dimensions is trivial. So interacting means that the field, very briefly, the field
that you construct, the probabilistic object
that you construct is not a Gaussian field. It's a non-Gaussian field. So that corresponds to an
interacting quantum field theory. So the question you may ask, why do we need a rigorous theory? So for that, you have to understand what theoretical physicist
do for Yang-Mills theories in the absence of a rigorous foundation. So what they do is they do
a perturbative calculation. So they take this
parameter G0 that I showed and do a kind of Taylor
expansion around G0 equals to 0. And it's a very complicated
expansion, okay? You have to do perturbative
renormalization. So there's a lot going on there. And this has been hugely successful in the several Nobel prizes for this. And there is also some degree
of rigorous justification for this perturbative calculations. For example, in this
work of Kevin Costello. However, there are some
fundamental problems. For example, this mass gap. And also, there is this
problem of quark confinement. These are believed to be beyond the reach of perturbation theory. So particularly for quark confinement, you really need a
non-perturbative construction. So the perturbative calculations, which is the most that
the physicist can do with the physics approaches don't suffice. So this is important. Okay, so let me speak briefly about lattice gauge theories, what it is. So I'm nearing the end of the talk. So Euclidean Yang-Mills theories
are the Markov processes that we need to construct
for applying this machinery of constructive field theory to construct quantum Yang-Mills theories
and solve this Clay problem. And even this Markov process
probabilistic objects, stochastic objects, we don't
know how to construct this in 4D or 3D, okay? So forget about the quantum theories, even the stochastic theories, we don't know how to construct. Lattice gauge theories are
discrete approximations of Euclidean Yang-Mills theories. And these are mathematically
well-defined, okay? There is no problem with the definition. These were defined in the '70s by Wilson. So just before going into
what we want to prove about lattice gauge theories,
there is a huge success story in lattice gauge theories'
numerical calculations. So you see the lattice
gauge theories approximate this Euclid Yang-Mills theory. And I told you, the
Euclidean Yang-Mills theory has this Hamiltonian H,
which is the same as the H that you want for your quantum theory. So if you just are
interested in understanding the spectrum of this Hamiltonian, it suffice us to study the Euclidean Yang-Mills theory, right? So you don't even have to
go to the quantum theory. And the Euclidean Yang-Mills theory, you don't know how to
define that rigorously, but lattice gauge
theories are well-defined. So you can use lattice gauge theories to do approximate calculations, okay? Numerical calculations. And there is huge
enterprise that does that. This has been active, I
think, since the mid-2000s, consisting of numerous collaborations. And there's this huge U.S. lattice quantum chromodynamics
consortium in the U.S., and then there are
organizations in UK and Europe, and they have produced, and these are very intense computations. You need supercomputers for
running these simulations. And they've produced
numbers for hadron masses and other quantities that
match experimental results up to a few percentages or
even less than a percent. So it's been experimental results. So there is no doubt that the
theories are working, okay? And this is the only way that people know how to verify these things,
for example, for mass gap. The perturbative calculations
don't give you this. Okay, so with lattice gauge theories, there is this long series of
papers by Balaban in the 1980s who attempted to construct 3D and 4D Euclidean Yang-Mills theories as continuum limits of
lattice gauge theories. So that's sort of the most
natural thing you can do, because lattice gauge
theories are a well-accepted discrete version of Euclidean
Yang-Mills theories, and they yield very good results
that match with experiment. So the natural way to approach, construct this Euclidean
Yang-Mills theories is as continuum limits
of gauge theories, right? So as far as I know, this
effort has remained unfinished. So Balaban proved that a crucial property known as ultraviolet stability holds, but the construction was not completed. And so to solve the Clay problem, there are two things that you can try. One is either you have to understand Balaban's work and complete it, okay? So that's a very formidable task, okay? And believe me, I've tried. So, okay. Or come up with a completely
different approach. And I don't know if that will be easier or more difficult than
the first one, okay? So there are these two
paths that you can try, and it's just saying ARA
complement, but that's okay. So okay, so just to say, if you're thinking why not just
take lattice gauge theories and construct a continuum limit, okay? People have tried. And there is a large number of papers that you can try to read. And actually, I was just
having this conversation. So there is an exposition
of Balaban techniques by Jonathan Dimock that you can look at. Maybe that'll be more accessible. Okay, so just to wrap up,
just some recent progress that has happened in the last 10 years, the probability community. So Balaban did these in the '80s and there was some work in the early '90s, but then things kind of quietened down until the mid-2000 where the
probability community started thinking about this problem and also other problems
from quantum field theory. So two main strands have emerged in this recent investigations. One is gauge-string duality
in lattice gauge theories. I'll briefly tell you what that is. And the other is stochastic quantization of Yang-Mills theories. So these are both just
in the beginning stages. There aren't huge results either of these, but there has been some progress. So let's now briefly discuss
these, and then I'll do it. So gauge-string duality is the idea that certain calculations
in Yang-Mills theory, so suppose you don't want to
really construct theories, but you just want to do some calculations, some expectation values
of some observables. There's the idea that certain calculations in Yang-Mills theories, these are theories of
quantum fields and particles, can be transferred to
calculations in string theories, which are theories of gravity. And this began with the work
of Maldacena in the 1990s. And it's a huge area
in theoretical physics for the last 30 years. And it's not very well-understood, like why this connection is there and where does it come from. And it has remained
largely out of the reach of rigorous mathematics. So I have a paper published in 2019, which shows that the calculations in certain lattice gauge
theories can be transferred to certain lattice string theories in what's called the
large-N 't Hooft limit. So it gives some rigorous results at least that you can do this transfer. And this has recently been rejuvenated by Scott Sheffield here
and his collaborators who have done quite deep investigations and extensions of these things and from a different perspective. And so this seems like
a promising direction. Now, this rigorous gauge-string duality, how can you take this forward? The recent results are
all for lattice models, and proving it to the continuum
remains an open problem. And one of the roadblocks to proving, doing some kind of
continuum theory is that the duality results that we have so far are only in the strong coupling regime, which is when this parameter
G0 that he wrote down is large. But one has to move to G0 small, which is called weak coupling regime, before hoping to pass the continuum limit. The other thing, which would be very nice to be able to do something about this, is that the gauge-string duality has been so successful
in theoretical physics is because string theories
allow calculations that Yang-Mills theories do not. So once you pass over to the string side, you have access to a lot of tools. The lattice string theories that we have so far have
not been so greatly helpful. So it'll be nice to be able to get, extract more juice out of the lattice string theories that we have, okay? Okay, so that's one thing. And finally, there is this
stochastic quantization. So again, very quickly, let me give you an
overview of what this is. So first, recall that
Euclidean Yang-Mills theories are the random fields
needed for constructing quantum Yang-Mills
theories using the tools from constructive field theory. Now, in the early 1980s, Parisi and Wu came up with this idea of constructing Euclidean Yang-Mill's theories and other Euclidean field theories. So this is the idea. Their idea was to
construct a Markov process whose stationary
distribution would be the law of this whole Euclidean Yang-Mills theory. So note this subtle point. The Euclidean Yang-Mills theory is itself supposed to be a Markov process, okay? Spread out over all time. Parisi and Wu proposes to
construct Markov process, which, at each instant of time,
is an entire Markov process representing the Euclidean
Yang-Mills theory. So they want to construct a Markov process of Markov of processes, okay? So you have this whole field, and this whole field is evolving. So this field is a Markov process, and this whole thing is evolving, okay? And once you construct that, stationary distribution will give you, so it seems like it makes the problem more complicated, okay? But although the new
problem looks more difficult than the original, it
seems to be more amenable to certain modern methods. So the Parisi-WU prescription
for the Markov process required for Euclidean Yang-Mills theory is a singular stochastic
partial differential question, which is called SPDE, known as the stochastic
Yang-Mills heat flow. And there has been, as
many of you may know, there has been great progress in singular SPDEs in the last decade, originating in the works of Martin Hairer. So we now have the tools to
construct some of these SPDEs. So what has been done is construction of short-term solutions to 2D and 3D stochastic Yang-Mills heat flows by these long list of authors. And also, there are new proofs of some difficult old results, such as the construction
of phi-four theory and three dimensions using these tools. So yeah, so that's what has been going on. Now, what remains to be
done is that these SPDEs that have been constructed, they need to have global
in-time solutions. So that is one of the main problems that you have only
local in-time solutions, short-time solutions. You need global in-time
solutions because remember, there's invariant measure. Stationary distribution
is the Yang-Mills theory that you're trying to construct. So to prove that there
is an invariant measure, you have to be able to prove that there is a global in-time solution. And the other problem is
that the methods as of now do not seem to apply to
four dimensional theories. So they go only up to three dimensions for certain deep reasons. And so it's not clear how one can approach to solve the 4D problems,
which is the important case. Okay, so here is a conclusion. So I hope I gave some idea
about what the problem is and what needs to be done. As I said, extremely hard problem does not seem to be
completely out of reach. It seems like one can make progress. There is a chance it may be solved in the next 10 to 15 years. It seems like that's my forecast, okay? But I don't know. One thing is, okay, these are some slides, but I'm actually writing a book. So it's 400 pages right now and maybe going to be around 500 pages. So it's basically what I
talked about in the slide and expanding, okay? So I'll have that. But yeah, I will try to finish it. I'm not sure when I'll finish it. Okay. Okay, so thank you.