AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society
Skip to main content
Donate Now
Sign
in
Sign
in
New
to AMS?
Register now.
Your Account
Your
Purchases
Your
Donations
Your
Member Directory Listing
Register
for a Meeting
AMS
Member Directory
Sign
out
MathSciNet
Bookstore
My Cart
Help
Menu
Menu
Publications
Publications Home
Over 100 years of publishing excellence
Books
AMS Bookstore
Rights, Licensing, Permissions
Open Math Notes
AMS Digital Library
Journals
eBook Collections
Author Resource Center
Librarian Resources
COUNTER Usage Statistics
Subscription Information
Licensing Information
My Titles
Mathematical Reviews/MathSciNet®
MathSciNet®
Reviewer Home
MathSciNet® Subscriptions
Membership
Membership Home
Welcome to your membership center
Membership Choices
Join the Society
Renew your Membership
Gift a Membership
Individual Membership
Member Benefits
Member Directory
Reciprocating Societies
Members in Developing Countries
Institutional Membership
Domestic Institutions
International Institutions
Two-Year Institutions
Graduate Student Chapter Program
Other Member Types
Corporate Memberships
Associate Memberships
Meetings & Conferences
Meetings & Conferences Home
Engage with colleagues and the latest research
National Meetings
Joint Mathematics Meetings
Upcoming JMMs
Previous JMMs
Special Lectures
Professional Enhancement Programs (PEPs)
Sectional Meetings
Upcoming Sectionals
Previous Sectionals
Presenting Papers
Hosting Sectionals
Other Meetings, Conferences & Workshops
International Meetings
Mathematics Calendar
Short Courses
Meetings Resources
Suggest a Speaker
AMS Meetings Grants
Submitting Abstracts
Welcoming Environment Policy
MathSafe – supporting safe meetings
News & Outreach
News & Outreach Home
Explore news, images, posters, and mathematical essays
News from the AMS
Feature Stories
Information for Journalists
In Memoriam
Math Voices
Feature Column
Math in the Media
Column on Teaching and Learning
Explorations
Recognizing Diverse Mathematicians
AMS Posters
Mathematics & Music
Mathematical Imagery
Mathematical Moments
Grants & Awards
Grants & Awards Home
Resources and opportunities to further your mathematical pursuits
Grants
AMS Backstop Grants
Research & Travel Grants
Child Care Grants for Meetings
Young Scholars Program Grants
Honors & Awards
Awards
Fellows of the AMS
AMS Fellowships
Stefan Bergman Fellowship
Birman Fellowship
Centennial Fellowship
Claytor-Gilmer Fellowship
Learning & Careers
Learning & Careers Home
Resources to support advanced mathematics teaching and learning
For Students
High School
Undergraduate
Graduate
Find Graduate Programs
Math Alliance at the AMS
For Faculty & Leaders
Department Chairs Workshop
Column on Teaching & Learning
Math in the Media
Salary & Departmental Data
Jobs
Employment Services
MathJobs
BEGIN Careers
Professional Development
Mathematics Research Communities
Mathematical Opportunities Listing
MathPrograms
Government Relations
Government Relations Home
Advocating for the mathematical sciences
Elevating Mathematics in Congress
Letters, Statements, & Legislation
Congressional Briefings
Legislative Priorities
Federal Issues of Concern
Federal Budget Process
Get Involved
Advocacy Resources
Contact Us
DC-Based Fellowships
Congressional Fellowship
Mass Media Fellowship
Catalyzing Advocacy in Science & Engineering (CASE) Fellowship
Giving
Giving to the AMS
Your gifts make great things happen for mathematics
What You Can Support
The 2020 Fund
Next Generation Fund
Birman Fellowship for Women Scholars
JMM Child Care Grants
Mathematics Research Communities
MathSciNet for Developing Countries
Create a Legacy
Make a Tribute Gift
Create a Permanent Fund
Establish a Prize, Award or Fellowship
Bequests and Charitable Estate Planning
Honoring Your Gift
Donor Stories
Donor Wall of Honor
Thomas S. Fiske Society
AMS Contributors Society
AMS Gardens
Giving Resources
AMS Development Committee
AMS Gift Acceptance Policy
Contact Us
Donate Now
About the AMS
About the AMS
Advancing research. Connecting the mathematics community
Our Organization
Accessibility
Equal Opportunity and Fairness
Jobs at AMS
Contact Us
Customer Service
Leadership
Executive Staff
Officers
Board of Trustees
Council
Executive Committee
Presidents
Committees
Governance Operations
Bylaws
Elections
Calendar of Meetings
Policy Statements & Guidelines
MathSciNet
Bookstore
Your Account
AMS Website Down
Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm.
Home
Notices of the American Mathematical Society
Notices of the American Mathematical Society
Welcome to the
Notices of the American Mathematical Society
.
With
support from AMS membership
, we are pleased to share the journal with the global mathematical community.
PDFLINK
History
Irregularity Is the General Rule
Cédric Villani
The young Henri Léon
Lebesgue
was only three years old when tuberculosis killed his father and his two sisters, and left him an invalid. Yet this son of a typesetter and a primary school teacher, from a modest Picardy family, went on to leave humanity one of the most brilliant and universal theories: measure theory.
Lebesgue’s Integral
Measuring the length of a curve, the area of a surface, or the volume of a solid are common operations, but subtle. Certainly, the area of a rectangle is the product of the lengths of its sides; but how do you measure the area of an irregular shape, perhaps full of holes or points invisible to the naked eye? To perform the calculation, one can cover the shape with small rectangles, making them smaller and smaller to cover the narrowest parts, but how can one be sure that this process will have a limit? That the total area of all these tiles, and therefore its limit, will not depend on arbitrary choices made by the tiler? This is precisely what
Lebesgue
’s key concept deals with: the integral of a function, or equivalently, the measure of a set.
His integration method radically improved on Bernhard
Riemann
’s, which had been the authority. With his colorful and humorous style,
Lebesgue
explains: “I have to pay a certain sum: I search my pockets and take out coins and bills of different values. I give them to my creditor in the order they appear until I reach the total amount of my debt. This is
Riemann
’s integral. But I can do it differently. Having taken out my money, I put together the bills of the same value, the similar coins, and I make the payment by handing over together all the money of the same value. This is my integral.”
Figure 1
.
Henri Léon
Lebesgue
.
The Universal Theory of Measure
At the dawn of the nineteenth century, France dreamed of offering the world a universal unit of measurement: the meter. At the dawn of the twentieth century, it was Henri Léon
Lebesgue
who offered us the universal theory of measure!
Measure theory provides a framework for defining the length or volume of irregular sets, and for performing operations on them—such as cutting them up, sticking them back together, and taking limits in an iterative process. It is the culmination of an approach begun by
Archimedes
, two thousand years earlier, when he sought to cut a disc into increasingly thin triangles in order to evaluate Pi!
No fewer than three centuries of analysis, probability, differential geometry, reasoning about the size and variations of quantities, about computing derivatives, about Fourier frequency analysis, from the infinitely small to the infinitely large, are unified in Lebesgue’s grand framework where everything harmoniously makes sense. This framework is naturally suited to irregular objects! Crumple up your handkerchief: it will take a horribly irregular shape... And yet the handkerchief is not an extravagant object; if you unfold it, it is perfectly flat! With this example, which he loved, the young Lebesgue highlighted an observation that would dominate all of twentieth-century science, from fundamental physics to fluctuating stock markets: In general, curves are not regular and do not admit tangents at every point. In fact, irregularity is the general rule!
A Conceptual Revolution
It had taken centuries for the concept of a “function”—a mathematical object that associates one value with another—to emerge. A new conceptual leap became possible, that of functional analysis, an abstract geometry wherein each point represents a function. The first masters of this art, the Poles Stefan
Banach
, Hugo
Steinhaus
, and Otto
Nikodym
, named these new geometries Lebesgue spaces, in honor of their inspiration. Similarly inspired, the Frenchman Jean
Leray
used Lebesgue integration in defining irregular solutions to key equations of mathematical physics.
Lebesgue
himself would not have believed it possible, but every good theory surpasses its creator, and his is no exception!
Taught all over the world, Lebesgue’s integral theory has become one of the pillars of science. I myself have written so many integrals in my life that as soon as I concentrate on a stubborn problem, my brain automatically traces the symbol for the integral, that characteristic elongated
!
$\int$
This is a tribute to the founding fathers of integral calculus, from Blaise
Pascal
and Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz
, but also to Lebesgue, who made this integral the basis of such a universal language and such a powerful tool. To paraphrase a famous French song from my youth (“La langue de chez nous”—“the language of our home”):
Lebesgue
gave us “the words we missed to understand each other, and the strength we need to live in harmony.”
Cédric Villani is a professor of mathematics at Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 and also teaches at Université de Rennes. His email address is
[email protected]
.
Article DOI:
10.1090/noti3324
Translated from a text written for the French Academy of Sciences. Jean-Pierre Bourguignon (translator) is the Nicolaas Kuiper Honorary Professor at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques. His email address is
[email protected]
.
Credits
Photo of Lebesgue is public domain:
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henri_Lebesgue#/media/File:Lebesgue_2.jpeg
.
Photo of Cédric Villani is courtesy of Siobhan Roberts.
Current Issue
About Notices
From the Secretary
Full Issues
Features
Career
Topical Columns
Reviews
What Is ...
Memorials
Notices Media Kit
Notices Features
Author Guidelines
Join the AMS
American Mathematical Society ·
201 Charles Street Providence, Rhode Island 02904-2213
·
Contact Us
AMS, American Mathematical Society, the tri-colored AMS logo, and Advancing research, Creating connections, are trademarks and services marks of the American Mathematical Society and registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
©
Copyright
2024
American Mathematical Society ·
View Our Privacy Statement
·
Terms of Use
·
Accessibility and AMS Online Content