Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                                 № 8/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                         T he Kakeya conjecture


                                  Jonathan Hickman 1




       The geometry of lines is a fundamental part of math-
       ematics and the way we interact with the physical
       world. Core concepts such as distance and angle, and
       the accompanying theory of trigonometry, have been
       studied since antiquity and taught to countless genera-
       tions of students. However, there are simple questions
       about lines which have stumped some of the greatest
       minds in mathematics over the last fifty years. One
       notable example is the Kakeya conjecture, which asks
       how lines which point in different directions can be
       packed together in a small space.

1 K a keya’s question

A Kakeya set is a shape that can fit a straight line segment of length 1 in every
possible direction. In Figure 1, we illustrate three simple examples: a disc, an
equilateral triangle, and a deltoid (a curved triangular shape). The equilateral
triangle is the most informative. Imagine fixing one end of a needle of length 1
at the top corner of the triangle. You can then rotate the needle inside the
triangle along an angle of 60° pointing upward. By symmetry, you also get
another 60° pointing downward. Altogether, that gives 120° of directions from

1 Supported by New Investigator Award UKRI097. The author thanks Lillian Pierce for

helpful comments and feedback on an earlier draft.


                                           1
               1                                 1                             1




                                                     √
       (a) Area: π/4.                 ( b ) Area: 1/ 3.               ( c ) Area: π/8.

                      F i g u r e 1 : Three examples of Kakeya sets.


this one corner. Repeating the same idea at the other two corners covers all the
possible directions (a full 360°).
   If we compare the areas of the three Kakeya sets in Figure 1, we see that
they get successively smaller. In fact, the deltoid has half the area of the disc.
This means that, within the deltoid, we have managed to pack the line segments
much more tightly.
   In the early 20th century, the Japanese mathematician Sōichi Kakeya (1886–
1947) was interested in these shapes and understanding different ways to pack
lines into small spaces. From his work, a natural question arose: what is the
smallest possible area of a Kakeya set?


2 Besicovitch’s sur pr ising answer

Around the same time, Abram Besicovitch, an influential mathematician working
in the field of analysis, was independently thinking about similar questions.
He discovered new and surprising methods to fit line segments into shapes,
and created Kakeya sets with much, much smaller area than any example seen
before. In fact, Besicovitch was able to show that
                   there exist Kakeya sets of arbitrarily small area!
   That is, if you want a Kakeya set with area less than 1/100, then Besicovitch’s
method can construct one for you. The same is true if you want a Kakeya
set of area less than 1/1000000000000: no matter how small a number you
choose, Besicovitch’s method can construct a Kakeya set with area smaller than
that number!
   How is this possible? How can we pack so many line segments into such a
tiny space? 2 To understand this, we go back to the example of the equilateral

2 Here we sketch a simplification of Besicovitch’s argument. A detailed history of the

problem, together with the precise description of the method, can be found in [1, Chapter 7].


                                             2
            △1                    △2




      (a) Cut △ into subtriangles △1 and △2 .       ( b ) Horizontally shift △1 and △2 .

                         F ig u r e 2 : The cut-and-shift procedure.


 triangle, which we denote by △. In Figure 2, we carry out the following
 “cut-and-shift” procedure to arrive at a new shape:

(a)     Cut △ into two “subtriangles” △1 and △2 along the vertical line through
        the top corner.
(b)     Shift △1 and △2 horizontally in opposite directions so that they overlap.

 The key observation is that, as we cut-and-shift, we do not lose any of the line
 segments swept out from the top corner. Furthermore, because of the overlap
 between the shifted subtriangles, the new shape has smaller area than △. The
 procedure therefore results in a shape with smaller area than the equilateral
 triangle △, but which still contains line segments in 120◦ of directions. This on
 its own is not very impressive. However, if we apply the procedure over and
 over many times, then we can amplify its effect and obtain a Kakeya set with a
 small area as desired.
     Rather than cutting △ into just two subtriangles, in Figure 3 we cut it into
 many subtriangles. As illustrated, we then shift the subtriangles horizontally,
 first to form pairs, and then to form pairs of pairs, and then pairs of pairs
 of pairs, and so on. By doing so, we create a huge amount of overlap, which
 means that the final shape K has much, much smaller area than the original
 triangle. By choosing the number of subtriangles to be very large, and carefully
 controlling the shifts, we can ensure that the area of K is as small as we wish.
 As before, K contains (shifted versions of) all the line segments spanned by the
 top corner of △, corresponding to lines in 120◦ of directions. We can then take
 three rotated copies of K to form a true Kakeya set containing line segments in
 all directions, see Figure 3. 3

 3 Taking three copies of K will increase the area by a factor of 3, but we can compensate

 for this by ensuring that the area of K is three times smaller than our target value.


                                                3
(a) Cut △ into many subtriangles.       ( b ) Horizontally shift to form pairs.




    (c) Form pairs of pairs. . .               (d ) The final shape K.




      (e) Take three rotated copies of K to form a true Kakeya set.

    F i g u r e 3 : Construction of a Kakeya set with very small area.




                                    4
   The above procedure describes a method of constructing a Kakeya set with
area smaller than any prescribed target value. In fact, using the same ideas,
Besicovitch was able to go one step further and showed that Kakeya sets of zero
area exist!


3 W hy are Kakeya sets impor tant?

Besicovitch’s construction is undoubtedly striking and beautiful. However,
around the time of its discovery, it is perhaps fair to say that the existence of
Kakeya sets of zero area was something of a curiosity. Besicovitch applied his
construction to solve a problem about integrals, but beyond this, it did not
appear to have much use.
   Mathematical ideas have a wonderful habit of reappearing in new and seem-
ingly unrelated contexts. What was once thought a curiosity can later emerge
as a profoundly important idea. Kakeya sets are a striking example of this.
Fifty years after Besicovitch’s work, startling discoveries led mathematicians to
realise their true significance, particularly in Fourier analysis.
   Fourier analysis is an important branch of mathematics which, at first sight,
has little to do with the kind of geometric problems we discussed. It instead
deals with the Fourier transform. This is a mathematical process which takes
an input function (which, for instance, can be interpreted as a signal, such as a
sound recording) and expresses it in terms of basic sine and cosine waves, each
with a fixed fundamental frequency. In this way, the Fourier transform is the
mathematical equivalent of sheet music. The same way sheet music describes
the individual notes which make up a chord, the Fourier transform describes
the frequencies of the individual waves which make up a function.
   Fourier analysis is essential to vast swathes of mathematics, physics, and
engineering. Many physical processes are much easier to understand when
described in terms of fundamental frequencies using the Fourier transform.
The same is true for pure mathematics: many famous problems in number
theory, including the ternary Goldbach problem [3], have been solved using the
Fourier transform.
   Here, we are interested in Fourier analysis in two dimensions. The funda-
mental building blocks are plane waves, which can be thought of as idealised
wave patterns extending across a flat surface. Each plane wave has a fixed
amplitude, frequency, and direction. Now imagine the function, to which we
want to apply the Fourier transform, describes the surface of a choppy sea. For
instance, we could imagine a harbour where the waves bounce off the shore and
end up travelling in lots of different directions. The Fourier transform allows
us to understand the choppy water in terms of underlying plane waves, each
with a fixed amplitude, frequency and direction. This decomposition reveals


                                       5
  (a) Before filtering, the function is           ( b ) Filtering causes the blue rectangles
      nicely spread out over the blue rect-           to double and the output function
      angles.                                         has an enormous peak.

                          F i g u r e 4 : Fefferman’s example.



how seemingly complicated behaviour emerges from the superposition of very
simple waves.
   In the early 1970s, Charles Fefferman studied a concept in Fourier analysis,
called (low pass) filter. A filter removes the high-frequency parts of a function,
leaving behind the smoother, low-frequency components. Filters play an im-
portant role in signal processing. As a simple example, imagine a poor-quality
sound recording with lots of clicks, cracks and glitches. Since this unwanted
noise is typically made up of high frequencies, applying a filter removes it and
improves the quality.
   Fefferman was interested in how filters behave in two dimensions, a problem
that was not well understood at the time. We would expect the filtered function
(with all the noise removed) to be smoother and better behaved than the
original input. This was known to be true in one dimension. Surprisingly,
Fefferman showed that this was not always the case in two dimensions! There
were functions which, before applying the filter, were nicely spread out in space;
however, after filtering, they focused into an enormous peak [2].
   To see this, Fefferman constructed a function which lives on rectangles placed
outside a Kakeya set. These rectangles are all spaced apart, so the function
is nicely spread out. When the filter is applied, he showed it has the effect of
doubling each of the rectangles. The geometry of the Kakeya set forces the
doubled rectangles to overlap, creating an enormous peak (see Figure 4).


                                              6
   Fefferman’s work revealed that the geometry of Kakeya sets plays a funda-
mental role in Fourier analysis in two and higher dimensions. Since Fourier
analysis is so central to the study of many physical processes, it soon became
clear that Kakeya sets are deeply linked to the study of important equations
of nature. These include the wave equation, which models water, sound, and
seismic waves, as well as Schrödinger’s famous equation from quantum mechan-
ics [6, 8]. Kakeya sets, which were once a curiosity, suddenly became one of
the most important objects in pure mathematics! For further details of the
connection between Fourier analysis and Kakeya sets, we refer the reader to [9].


4 T h e Kakeya conjecture

After it became clear that Kakeya sets are fundamental to many different
mathematical problems, researchers aimed to develop a deeper understanding of
their geometry. In addition to the planar Kakeya sets that we have discussed so
far, mathematicians became increasingly interested in their solid counterparts
in 3-dimensional space. The definition of a Kakeya set makes perfect sense for
solid shapes, but the situation becomes more complicated in three dimensions
because there are far more possible directions to consider.
   As discussed earlier, Besicovitch showed that there exist Kakeya sets in
the plane with zero area. Using Besicovitch’s ideas, it is not difficult to show
that Kakeya sets also exist in 3-dimensional space with zero volume. Despite
this, Kakeya sets should still be, in some sense, reasonably large and fill out
space. The precise formulation of this statement is known as the 3–dimensional
Kakeya conjecture.
   To understand the Kakeya conjecture, we return to the 2-dimensional plane.
We take a step back and think a little bit about what we mean by area.
   In Figure 5, we illustrate a simple way to approximate the area of a shape S.
For a small number δ > 0, we place S on a grid of squares of side length δ. We
then count the number of squares which intersect S and denote this number
by N (S, δ). For example, in the case shown in Figure 5, we have N (S, δ) = 44.
We then have the simple approximation

                  Area(S) ≈       N (S, δ)        ×         δ2
                                                           |{z}          .
                                  | {z }
                              Number of squares       Area of a square


This approximation becomes more and more accurate as δ gets smaller and
smaller, which corresponds to taking a finer and finer grid of squares. We express
this succinctly by saying that Area(S) is given by the limit of N (S, δ) × δ 2 as δ
tends to 0. In symbols, this is written as

                   N (S, δ) × δ 2 → Area(S)           as      δ → 0.


                                         7
                     1 2 3                      4 5 6
                        7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
                             17 18 19 20 21 22
                             23 24 25 26 27 28
                       29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38
                    39 40 41                   42 43 44

                                             δ
 Figu r e 5 : For the above choice of δ > 0, we approximate the area of the blue
             shape S by Area(S) ≈ N (δ, S) × δ 2 = 44 × δ 2 .


 Besicovitch’s construction shows that there exists a Kakeya set K satisfying

                             N (K, δ) × δ 2 → 0       as δ → 0.

 This is precisely what it means for a set K to have zero area.
   We can get more information about the size of a shape S by studying the
 approximate areas N (S, δ) × δ 2 for different values of δ. To illustrate this:
(1) Single point: Suppose S is just a single point. Then S intersects only one
    square, so N (S, δ) = 1. The approximate area is therefore

                                       N (S, δ) × δ 2 = δ 2 .

    As δ gets smaller, δ 2 gets smaller at a fast rate. We can think of the
    approximate area as shrinking to zero very quickly.
(2) Line or curve: Suppose S is a line or a curve of length 1. Each square
    can cover only a segment of S of length roughly δ, 4 so in total we need
    roughly 1/δ squares to cover S. In other words,

                                         N (S, δ) ≈ 1/δ.

     Therefore, the approximate area is

                                        N (S, δ) × δ 2 ≈ δ.

     This still shrinks to zero as δ gets smaller, but at a slower rate than in
     Example (1).

 4 If the curve bends a lot in the square, then the square will cover more of the length of the

 curve. However, the exact length is not important for us: we just need to know it is roughly δ.


                                                 8
   Both the point in Example (1) and the line or curve in Example (2) have
zero area. However, the rate at which the approximate area N (S, δ) × δ 2 shrinks
to zero distinguishes their size. In this way, the rate indicates the dimension of
the underlying shape. For the 0-dimensional point in Example (1), the rate is
very fast. For the 1-dimensional line or curve in Example (2), the rate is much
slower. Pushing this a little further, it is possible for a shape S in the plane to
be 2-dimensional and have zero area. This means that the rate at which

                                      N (K, δ) × δ 2

shrinks to 0 is very, very slow.
   For planar shapes, the Kakeya conjecture asserts that
       a Kakeya set K in the plane always has dimension 2.
In other words, the approximate area N (K, δ) × δ 2 can only shrink to zero at
a very slow rate. In this sense, although Kakeya sets can have zero area, they
must still be reasonably large and fill out space.
   The same idea can be applied to solid Kakeya sets in 3-dimensional space.
For this, we consider the approximate volume N (S, δ) × δ 3 of a solid shape S.
This is computed by drawing a grid of δ × δ × δ cubes and counting the
number N (S, δ) of cubes which intersect S. In three dimensions, the Kakeya
conjecture asserts that
       a Kakeya set K in 3-dimensional space always has dimension 3.
Analogously to the planar case, this means that the approximate volume of K
can only shrink to zero at a very slow rate.
   It turns out that the Kakeya conjecture in the plane is not too difficult.
Multiple proofs were found in the 1970s, each showing that any planar Kakeya
set has dimension 2. 5 However, the problem in 3-dimensional space is much,
much harder, as the additional directions make the situation considerably
more complicated.
   Understanding whether the Kakeya conjecture holds in three dimensions is
one of the most important problems in modern mathematics. If it were false,
then that would mean that there exist extremely small Kakeya sets that could
be used to construct functions which behave extremely badly under filtering.
These functions would be far worse behaved than those featured in Fefferman’s
original argument. Consequently, they would also disprove a large number of
important conjectures in Fourier analysis and related areas. For this reason,
there are many questions we cannot hope to answer without first determining
whether or not the Kakeya conjecture is true.

5   See, for instance, [8] and [5].


                                            9
5 Spectacular progress

Over the last 50 years, many mathematicians have worked on the Kakeya
conjecture in three and higher dimensions. Through their work, deep connections
were discovered between the problem and questions in arithmetic, algebra, and
other areas of mathematics [4, 8]. However, a solution always appeared far out
of reach. The Kakeya conjecture achieved a certain notoriety, and within the
field, became a byword for a difficult, nearly impossible challenge.
    This remained the state of affairs until February 2025, when Hong Wang
and Joshua Zahl announced a spectacular full solution of the 3-dimensional
problem [7]. Their monumental proof is hundreds of pages long and is spread over
multiple papers. It combines a rich array of ideas, and relies on contributions
from many different mathematicians over the last 30 years. However, their
proof also incorporates a wealth of new and deep insights and marks a major
leap in our understanding. The work of Wang and Zahl is certainly a great and
historic achievement in modern mathematics.
    Mathematicians are now working hard to fully digest the innovations intro-
duced by Wang and Zahl. It is likely that their work will lead to breakthroughs
on a wide range of important problems in the geometry of lines, Fourier analysis,
and beyond. The next chapter of this story will be an exciting one!




                                       10
I m a g e credits

 All images were created by the author.


R e f e rences

[1] K. J. Falconer, The geometry of fractal sets, Cambridge Tracts in Mathe-
    matics, vol. 85, Cambridge University Press, 1986.

[2] C. Fefferman, The multiplier problem for the ball, Annals of Mathematics
    Annals of Mathematics. Second Series 94 (1971), 330–336.
[3] H. Helfgott, The ternary Goldbach problem, Snapshots of modern math-
    ematics from Oberwolfach, no. 03 (2014), https://doi.org/10.14760/
    SNAP-2014-003-EN.

[4] N. Katz and T. Tao, Recent progress on the Kakeya conjecture, Proceedings
    of the 6th International Conference on Harmonic Analysis and Partial
    Differential Equations (El Escorial, 2000), 2002, pp. 161–179.
[5] P. Mattila, Fourier analysis and Hausdorff dimension, Cambridge Studies
    in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 150, Cambridge University Press, 2015.
[6] T. Tao, From rotating needles to stability of waves: emerging connections
    between combinatorics, analysis, and PDE, Notices of the American Mathe-
    matical Society 48 (2001), no. 3, 294–303.
[7] H. Wang and J. Zahl, Volume estimates for unions of convex sets, and the
    Kakeya set conjecture in three dimensions, Preprint: arXiv:2502.17655.
[8] T. Wolff, Recent work connected with the Kakeya problem, Prospects in
    mathematics (Princeton, NJ, 1996), American Mathematical Society, 1999,
    pp. 129–162.
[9] J. Zahl, Rotating needles, vibrating strings, and fourier summation, Snap-
    shots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach, no. 06 (2020), https:
    //doi.org/10.14760/SNAP-2020-006-EN.




                                     11
Jona t h a n H i ck m a n i s a Reader of pure   Connect i o n s t o o t h e r f i e l d s
math e m a t i c s a t t h e University of       Physics
Edinbu r g h .
                                                 License
Math e m a t i c a l s u b j e c ts              Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0
Analy s i s
                                                 DOI
                                                 10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 8 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r                              Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Bar ka t B h ayo                                 Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de               Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                 77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                              Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e                Director
                                                 Gerhard H u i s ke n
