Séminaire N. Bourbaki
SAMEDI 28 MARS 2026
Institut Henri Poincaré (amphithéatre Charles Hermite)
11 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris




10h00       Abed BOUNEMOURA
            Instabilité dans le problème planétaire
     Le problème planétaire à 1 + n corps est un système d’équations différentielles modélisant l’évolution
du système solaire, à savoir le mouvement de n corps (« planètes ») en interaction gravitationnelle autour
d’un corps plus massif (« Soleil »). Les mathématiciens et astronomes ont cru pendant longtemps à sa
stabilité : les trajectoires elliptiques (képlériennes), présentes lorsque les planètes n’interagissent pas entre
elles, ne sont que légèrement déformées lorsque l’on restaure cette interaction (« théorème » de stabilité
de Laplace–Lagrange). Mais depuis les travaux de Poincaré et d’Arnold, on s’attend au contraire à de
l’instabilité, bien que cela ait résisté aux efforts des mathématiciens. Le but de l’exposé est d’expliquer un
résultat de Clarke, Fejoz et Guardia qui montre que pour le problème à 1 + n = 4 corps (ou plus), il existe
des mouvements dont le demi-grand axe d’un des corps a une variation aussi grande que l’on veut. Ceci
montre que la conclusion du théorème de stabilité de Laplace–Lagrange n’est pas valide pour le problème
planétaire, et résout une conjecture d’Arnold.




11h30       Larry GUTH
            The Kakeya conjecture in ℝ3 , after Hong Wang and Joshua Zahl
    The Kakeya conjecture is a question about how thin tubes can overlap with each other in Euclidean
space. It connects to problems in Fourier analysis and PDE, such as understanding L p type estimates
for solutions of the wave equation. This connection has prompted a lot of work on the problem in the
harmonic analysis community.
    The 2-dimensional case of the Kakeya conjecture has a 1-page proof and has been known since
the 1970s. Recently, Wang and Zahl proved the 3-dimensional case of the Kakeya conjecture. Their
work builds on contributions of many people, including Bourgain, Wolff, Katz, Laba, Tao, Orponen, and
Shmerkin.
    There are interesting examples related to algebraic geometry which show that some cousins of the
Kakeya conjecture are false. These counterexamples are also important clues for understanding the prob-
lem. In the proof of Kakeya, we imagine a hypothetical counterexample, we prove that it would have to
have a great deal of algebraic structure, and we finally show that it cannot exist at all. A hypothetical
counterexample to the Kakeya conjecture is just a set of thin tubes in 3-dimensional space which overlap
each other a lot. We will try to describe how to prove that such a set has algebraic structure.
14h30        Jordan ELLENBERG
             Recent Progress around Cohen–Lenstra Heuristics
    In 1983, Henri Cohen and Hendrik Lenstra proposed a conjecture about the distribution of the N -
torsion of the class group of a random quadratic field, supported by what was at the time a large amount
of computational evidence. The Cohen–Lenstra heuristics, which are still almost entirely unproven, have
become one of the central foundational problems in arithmetic statistics. Recent years have seen a rapidly
accelerated pace of development in Cohen-Lenstra problems. I will give a tour of these developments,
including the work of Wood and her collaborators developing a fully fleshed out roster of generalized
Cohen–Lenstra conjectures, with support from topology; Smith’s theorems proving the Cohen–Lenstra
conjectures for the 2-primary part of the class group, as part of more general theorems about Selmer
groups in quadratic twists, leading to a resolution of the minimalist conjecture for elliptic curves; and
recent work by Koymans and Pagano in the 2-primary case, expanding on Smith’s work and proving
Stevenhagen’s conjecture on the negative Pell equation.




16h00        Peter SCHOLZE
             Geometric Langlands, after Gaitsgory, Raskin, ...
    At its core, the Langlands program seeks to give a description of the vector space of automorphic
forms. This is a space of functions on a locally symmetric space X /Γ, where Γ = G (ℤ) ⊂ G (ℝ) is an
arithmetic group, equipped with its Hecke symmetries. One seeks a “dual” description, in terms of L -
parameters, which are roughly representations of the absolute Galois group with values in the Langlands
dual group.
    Similar conjectures exist in the function-field case; in this setting, the quotient X /Γ can be interpreted
as the 𝔽p -points of the stack BunG of G -bundles on a curve C over 𝔽p . Gaitsgory–Raskin, partly in large
collaborations, proved a fine version of Langlands’ conjecture in this setting, in the everywhere unramified
case. Notably, they define a vector space on the Galois side, as global sections of a sheaf on the moduli
stack of L -parameters, and relate this to the space of automorphic forms, compatibly with the Hecke
symmetries.
    Their proof is a culmination of many decades of work in the geometric Langlands program, and
consists of two key steps: 1) The space of automorphic forms is the trace of Frobenius on a category of
𝓁-adic sheaves on BunG . 2) This category of 𝓁-adic sheaves on BunG is equivalent to a category of coherent
sheaves on the stack of L -parameters. The starting point for 2) is the observation that this conjecture
makes sense for curves over any field, and any sheaf theory, and is known as the geometric Langlands
equivalence. The proof starts over the complex numbers, and uses D -modules.




    Association des collaborateurs de N. Bourbaki
    Institut Henri Poincaré, 11 rue Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, 75231 Paris Cedex 05
    Courriel : association@bourbaki.fr Web : www.bourbaki.fr
