Tim Gowers from the University of Cambridge. Tim's had a long-standing interest in automatic theorem proving, and today he's going to talk to us about towards the database of motivated proofs. Thank you very much. So, my main theme is going to be a project that I have a group here in Cambridge on that works on automatic automatic theorem proving. And we got a So, I have a grant to set up that group, and we also put in a bid for the AI for maths fund say about a year ago. Um which was successful. And the bid was to build what we call the a database of motivated proofs. So, I want to say a bit about what those are. Um and report on where we've got so far. Uh quick spoiler, there's nothing in the database yet. There's not even a database to put anything in. But that wasn't the first step. So, I'm going to talk about the first step, which is also not complete yet. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; But uh more on those sorts of apologies and qualifications later on. Just a quick uh um slide on sort of different kinds of automatic theorem proving just to place our group. So, in the past, there always used to be the distinction between uh drawn between human-oriented and machine-oriented automatic theorem proving. So, human-oriented was where you tried to take inspiration from how humans find proofs and then use that to write programs that would be sort of like that. Uh find proofs in a similar sort of way. And then I have a machine-oriented automatic theorem proving, which was uh trying to exploit what computers have that we don't have, like a lot of speed and memory and so on. So, they're much better able, for example, to do brute-force searches than we are. The experience seemed to be that uh the machine-oriented approach was really good for certain sorts of problems that sort of lend themselves [clears throat] to big brute-force searches. But for normal problems, they tend to behave very badly because you had with all these brute-force searches and quite deep lines chains of reasoning, you'd just get combinatorial explosions all over the place. And of course, the whole landscape has changed a lot in the last few years with the arrival of AI, uh which I've slightly dismissively called AI black boxes. So, but what I mean there is with AI, the idea is you don't try to understand how humans find proofs. That's a sort of very much against the ethos of a a lot of people working in AI. You don't want to do that. You just want to sort of train the AI and get it to discover that for itself. But the resulting products tend to have a sort of black-box feel. You sort of feed something into your thing, and if you're lucky, the proof comes out. And if it does, you don't get that much insight into uh how it um succeeded and how many other things it tried and all that type of thing. Okay, that was just a a very quick thing which we all we all basically know. So, what do I mean roughly by a motivated proof? And I'm I'll elaborate on this a lot with um example uh one one particular key example. But basically, I just mean a proof where you don't uh hide [clears throat] your reasoning process. So, a lot of proofs in the literature, you have steps where um for example, if you need to construct an object that has certain properties, you just uh exhibit the object, verify that it has the properties, and the reader is left thinking, how on earth did somebody think of that object and how on earth did they predict that this object with the funny expression defining it would indeed turn out to have those properties, which it sort of magically turns out to do when you when you start to check. Um I've missed the enclosed inverted commas, unfortunately. Anyway, um and then yes, so that's objects. And then another way in which you can have a sort of non-motivated proof is when you just say, we prove the following lemma that looks completely irrelevant. Uh trust me, you know, later on we'll see that it sort of jumps in just the way you need it and completes the proof or it takes takes a big step [clears throat] towards completing the proof. Sometimes with those lemmas, you can get rid of the magic feel by just reordering the proof. You say you just present it backwards rather than forwards. You say you've got a a thing you need. Wouldn't it be nice if that one would be nice if you had that? And wouldn't it be nice if you had that? Oh, we do have that. Uh here's a lemma. Um and then you sort of rewrite it in a way that makes it look as though it's unmotivated, when in fact, it was a bit more motivated. I think a lot of mathematicians are quite experienced at just not reading proofs in [snorts] the order in which they're written um for that very reason. But I think sometimes um you know, I go to seminars where somebody says um I'm going to define this funny object and it's not at all clear how the definition's going to help, and it's not even clear how you would have arrived at that even by reasoning backwards. So, [snorts] uh you can have unmotivated things um even despite the even even with a sort of optimal presentation of uh proof, you have unmotivated steps. Uh so, I want to talk about just to make this sort of sort of drive home the point about what a motivated [clears throat] proof is and an unmotivated proof. Perhaps the most famous unmotivated proof in mathematics, uh which I'm I hope everybody here has seen the problem, because otherwise, I'm just going to spoil it for you. Um So, the problem is you take a grid, an 8x8 grid of squares with two opposite corners missing, and the question is, can you tile it with dominoes, where a domino equals two adjacent squares? Uh and if you try it, you know, you sort of tile that one, that one, that one, then that one, that one, that one. You keep going, and you find that however you do it, you seem to get uh stuck right near the end. Or earlier than that if you're slightly silly in the way you try and do it. Um and so, you start to think the answer is no, but there seem to be so many sort of different cases to consider that it gets completely hopeless until somebody does that. And uh then you sort of see [snorts] the proof. Each domino covers one white square and one black square, but there are more white squares than there are black squares, so done. And I've heard this sort of cited as an example of the kind of proof that humans can find, but a computer would never be able to find. And uh so, now I want to sort of say what a motivated proof of this would look like. It's going to be much, much longer. Um and one can argue a bit about uh you know, what counts as motivated and so on. I'll come back to that, but I somehow want to try to present it in such a way that it seems natural that the idea would emerge uh from a certain thought process. So, what do we do? Well, first of all, we have to formulate the problem in a mathematical way. So, let's just say we have a we have the set one up to eight squared, and then we take away one one and eight eight. Those are the two opposite corners. And we define a tile to be a shape. This is the pointer instead of my finger. Um I hope it's this. Yeah. So, a tile is one of these or one of these. And I've written tile in this font to be the property that when you've got a subset, that it can be tiled with dominoes. Um and we and B is this shape here. So, we want to prove that it is not the case that tile B. You can't tile B. Um right. So, the name of the game is something counts as motivated in my book if you can use extremely standard uh proof-generating techniques to get the proof. [clears throat] I think we can all agree that if you've got a property that you want to show, uh and you've got some information about uh about the object you want to show it off, then finding some other property of that object that then implies the property you want. It's like finding sort of an intermediate property. That's a very standard thing to do. You want to prove that A implies B, you find a C such that A implies C and C implies B. That's a sort of totally standard proof technique. So, it doesn't require you to say, how on earth did anyone think of looking for an intermediate property? So, it counts as motivated. So, you Uh for example, people just coordinate-izing the board will already see the motivation. So, that's a very important point. What counts as motivated is very much a relative concept. It's relative to your level of experience. And of course, uh if I ask this to a a non-mathematician who would be able to appreciate the problem, they certainly wouldn't think of uh of this step here. But I think they might think of something that's kind of translatable quite easily into this in this particular case. But there'll be other situations where something would be motivated to somebody with one level of experience and not to somebody with another level of experience, because ideas that would just immediately pop into your mind for the first person would not immediately pop into the mind for the second person. Um but that is So, that is important that it's a relative concept. Uh okay. So, um another thing that for us for a certain level of experience, the properties and sets, particularly if you're a Lean-type person, properties and sets are sort of the same thing. So, instead of finding a property, we'd like to find a function as that a tile A implies that function is zero and that um function [clears throat] that evaluates to B is one. That's clearly equivalent. But that leaves us with What the advantage of having done that is we can now generalize. So, instead of why why have a zero-one valued function? Why not have just some other function um where if you can be tiled, then you belong to one subset, and if and then B it not belong to that subset. This is a generalization of this. Um And now our sort of key technique for these things, we don't really know what to take for the for the set or the function or anything. We've we've just sort of in this abstract thing. So, a lot of the time in maths if you don't know what to do, you just say let's pretend we've we have made that choice and just plow on regardless. So, let's just say you know, we have got a function, we've got a set X and we've got a set Y. Let's continue with the proof. And then later on we'll find that we actually needed these functions and sets and things to have certain properties. We just add those in as we need them. So, that's a a very standard technique. It goes right back to uh solving equations. If I've got some simultaneous equations or something, I just assume I've got the solutions X, Y, and Z. I say what let's deduce a few things about it until eventually I get it into triangular form or something that becomes obvious what to what to choose. Uh and in the &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; for those who know that's we we're we're making these meta variables. Well, that's a fancy way of saying I'll pretend I've chosen them. Uh Yeah, so we want to show that maybe I'll go through this sort of a bit faster. I just want to look at a very short sort of thing, so perhaps I won't go full detail, but we want to prove that um f of A belongs to the subset Y for every A that can be tiled. But the tiling property is sort of it's very natural to think of it inductively because you're sort of we've already thought about trying to build up the tiling and adding more and more dominoes. Um So, uh one of the properties we'd need, we'd need that um the empty set belongs to or f of the empty set belongs to Y and then if you add a domino to something that's uh to some set A with uh um f of A belonging to Y, then f of A union D if it's disjoint, that should also belong to Y. And uh looking at special cases, very simple special cases, not just sort of magically chosen special cases, extremely [clears throat] basic special cases. If I consider the case A equals empty set, which is the most obvious special case, I'll get that f of each domino has to belong to Y. Um Now, I've got a slight problem here, which is that I've got information about f of A and f of D and I want information about f of A union D. How do I do that? I have to somehow sort of got to create f of A and f of D so that I can say something about them. So, wouldn't it be nice if f of A union D could be expressed in terms of f of A and f of D? Now, because f is a meta variable, there's no reason not to sort of just add that in as a property I would like f to have. So, I'll do that and I'll just say well, if f of A union D is just f of A some function of f of A and f of D, which I've expressed in infix notation. Um then I've got more of a chance of proving the goal. Uh so, now I've got a &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; binary operation on a set X. Now, one of the things we can do is just sort of say let's try the absolute simplest thing we know. So, what are the sort of simplest binary operations we have? Well, addition is a pretty simple one. It's a pretty obvious one to think of first if you're in search of a binary operation and don't really know very much. So, it's pretty natural then to in this context once we've decided we need a binary operation to say uh we'd like the property that f of A union D equals f of A plus f of D. Then uh well, in that situation we want that f of A in Y and f of D in Y implies f of A plus f of D belongs to Y. So, we'd quite like Y to be closed under addition. It's not absolutely necessary, but that would be an obvious way of getting this to hold. Um and uh so, what are some simple examples of sets that are closed under addition that are non-empty proper subsets of other sets, which it's straightforward to see that Y has to be non-empty [clears throat] and proper. Some pretty obvious examples are I think maybe earlier on I'd taken X to be R. Or maybe I haven't. Third line. Uh oh yes, thank you. Yes. All right, so that was again sort of just choosing a sort of very simple example. And there are quite a few obvious examples of sets that are closed under addition. So, here we might sort of do a bit of a search before realizing that uh that um Yeah, I'm not saying that there's one inevitable path. But if we eventually settle on uh singleton zero as being a really simple subset of the reals that's closed under addition. Um then we've got to the idea of an invariant, basically. We've got that we want something that Uh so, basically I'm trying to present this to somebody who's not already familiar with uh the idea of invariants. If you're familiar with the idea of invariants, we could have saved a lot of time. So, let's just search for an invariant. Um And once you've got that, it's quite easy. Rest of the rest of it's pretty much forced. I think I won't uh discuss that in huge detail, but uh once you see that you want uh something that's um that's additive for disjoint sets. Uh and um you then get that uh it's determined by its value on singletons. And once you've got it for one singleton, just using the fact that each domino is going to have to be zero. That tells you that for each point once you've chosen a value, the neighboring point has to have minus that value. And then you that builds up inevitably to sort of mathematical equivalence of the chessboard pattern that we saw lambda on the white squares and minus lambda on the black squares or something. And then you can verify that that works. Um there's no guarantee in advance that the first invariant we thought of was going to work, but in this case it does. Um And we could have maybe tried some other invariants first like um just counting how many squares you cover and then you just find ah, but 62 is an even number, so that doesn't work. Um and then we eventually arrive at this one. Right. So, that's supposed to give you sort of an idea of what we think of as a motivated proof, something that really is goes to into much more trouble to explain where the ideas come from. Um So, why should we bother with this? Um I think there are all sorts of reasons and some of them are tied in with things that we've been taught about yesterday. And some of them are more to do with um Well, so one idea is that just motivated proofs are kind of nice things to have. If you've got a proof that seems to have magic steps, you feel people often complain I understood this proof line by line, but uh I don't really see how anyone would have thought of it. And then when you have that reaction to a proof, I think that's a way of saying I don't really fully understand the proof. I I sort of understand it in one sense at a sort of superficial level, but not at a deep level. I don't see what was inevitable about this argument and someone would like that kind of inevitability. Um Another thing is that uh I think this is a very important point that that um something that the mathematical community could potentially do better is uh how we how we train PhD students. I think at the moment we don't really train them at all. We just chuck them in at the deep end. Here are some problems. Perhaps if they're lucky we'll just do joint work with them and they can sort of learn by watching what we do, but uh if we just come up with things that they think are unmotivated, that's not always 100% helpful. We don't really um despite a few heroic efforts by people like Polya, we don't um we don't really say here's how to go about solving an unsolved [clears throat] problem. And that's because it's very difficult. It's not I'm not claiming that there's a sort of easy answer to that. Although I'm hoping that motivated proofs uh is one part of such an answer. Uh so, if we had a a database of motivated proofs, we might have a database we would well, we would have a database of proofs that really make it clear where all the ideas come from and that could be useful from educational reasons. But these days it's not just humans that we're trying to train, it's also uh AI systems that we want to train. So, one reason I think for some of the things that have been maybe less now than um say a year or two ago, but um one of the sort of problems with um LLMs was they [clears throat] would uh be trained on the literature that has lots and lots of uh rabbits coming out of hats. And they would just try to imitate that. So, they would then sort of sort of say consider the following object and then give us a sort of bogus argument that object worked. Play this particular puzzle with the LLM? Uh I'll talk about it in a minute. Actually, so I was just coming to that actually. So, um if we had oops, sorry, didn't mean to do that. If we had a um an LLM that was trained on a database of motivated proofs, then there's the hope that it would be able not just to uh find proofs, but find proofs and really explain in a convincing way where the ideas came from. And that would be sort of more useful I think as an educational tool than just an LLM that tells you the answer the whole time. Instead of just what a a bad teacher does somehow. And yeah, I did exactly ask uh ChatGPT 5.4 Pro the uh chessboard question. I told this guy to a little bit mention chessboards and so on. I said we have Well, I expressed it somewhat like the formulation that I had here. Of course, it recognized it immediately and it said the word chessboard came into its answer and all the rest of it. So, um I then said, how did you think of that uh &gt;&gt; I said that seemed like a remarkably clever idea. How did you think of it? And then it sort of said all kinds of things like uh very often in tiling problems it's useful to look for parity type invariants and all type of thing. So, it wasn't really uh basically in in short it was saying I've seen it before. It wasn't giving a proper answer. And then I said okay that all makes sense for somebody who's familiar with tiling problems and the notion of invariance but somebody some at some point must have come up with this idea in the first place. How do you think that happened? And then it didn't have a satisfactory answer to that. So, it said well, I think it probably took a very long time and happened extremely gradually over the course of several sec &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; rather than that sort of account like the one I've just given. So, there we go. So, at the moment I think we can safely say that it's they're not really uh not really very useful for giving us motivated proofs. Based on a sample of one but uh anyway. And then finally and I think this is actually important that I really think that human beings when we're looking for proofs almost by definition for motivated proofs because we just have a certain bunch of tricks that we use for researching for proofs. Um so, if we could train um LLMs to look for proofs explicitly in a sort of motivated way that ought to be much more efficient than just showing them lots and lots of proofs and saying come up with some more examples that look a bit like that. It that somehow encourages I can't I don't have a sort of I can't really argue this with 100% but I feel that that encourages brute force type [clears throat] approaches. You sort of try a bunch of things until you find something that works because you're a computer you can afford to do that. But then when you want to scale up eventually combinatorial explosion should hit you. So, um I don't know for sure but I think it's possible that uh there will be a plateau. We'll eventually reach a plateau. It's going to be it's going to be a lot higher at the plateau a lot higher than I would have thought it would have arrived at a couple of years ago but uh but yeah. You're saying this is sort of motivated and unmotivated like it's sort of binary thing. Do you see it in much more of a Yeah. continuum? Yeah. I do. So, that's that's I'm just doing that to to simplicity but I absolutely I agree that it's a continuum but not just that it's relative to your experience but that Yeah, sometimes we do find things almost by accident. We tried five things and then the fifth one worked. And so, it's got a sort of slight feeling of lack of motivation because usually afterwards we try and sort of retell the story and say how why why should why should I have sort of not have tried those first four things and gone straight for the fifth one. But if we're honest that's not what we actually did. So, yeah. Well, this is a funny thing because I'm a big believer that proofs should be understandable. And yet it seems you're declaring war on having any insight. Sometimes you have an idea and this this clicked it. And things are not always true for a reason like think of you know Conway's life. So, in Conway's life you have these things called gliders that move. They're just there. There's no particular reason why such a thing should exist or why there should be this big construction called a glider gun that gives you a whole stream of them. It just happens to be there and if you fool around long enough you find one, you know. &gt;&gt; Well, I think that's in the end of it. So, I don't I don't think that everything has a motivated proof. I think some things are best found by brute force search. So, I think [clears throat] that my sort of motivated account of how did anyone ever think of the glider was not they went into the room and they had these brilliant sort of ideas and realized that if you did this and then but more sort of a lot of people tried a lot of things and eventually somebody stumbled on a glider. I think that we I certainly don't deny that that is how some mathematics is discovered even maybe quite a lot. Um So, we must uh Yeah, so when it comes to building a database um as it's already clear people have slightly different thoughts about what counts as a motivated proof. So, if we want to build a database and crowdsource it so to speak which is what we what we do want to do it's going to be extremely important that there should be some sort of gold standard about what counts as a motivated proof. Otherwise the moderation process would be an absolute nightmare. So, that's why I said there was a first stage. The first stage is to build what we are calling currently a motivated proof facilitator although maybe arguable whether it actually facilitates at the moment um a sort of platform that will I I find when I try to write motivated proofs um in a reasonably formal way that I keep having to say well, I've got a proof state here then the natural thing to do is this and I've reason to do a lot of sort of cutting and pasting and may take writing out another state and it's an absolute pain in the neck and I end up with sort of documents that sort of PDFs that have sort of 12 pages of uh um things with little accounts of what happened. But if you could have that on your laptops or platform that would allow you to do the moves and do take out a lot of the labor from that it would make it much easier. And if you have a platform so our gold standard for what should count as a motivated proof is drop the word motivated in it because it has too many associations for people. Call it instead move generated where move generated means just generated by standard moves. If the moves are sufficiently standard you should never need to type anything into this platform. You should be able to do everything by point and click and selecting from menus and dragging this over here and so on. So, that's the uh We would count a proof of being really properly motivated if nobody if somebody can can produce it without having to type things in. In the remainder of this talk I'm going to demonstrate that for one or two very simple arguments on the very early prototype that we have so far. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; With the caveat yeah. Um before you move on cuz I still have a question on this slide. Um So, um I'm not a mathematician but as I might observe that finding solutions or finding insights uh is is like a way of training students to learn mathematics to learn how to find those insights. Basically a manual. So, I I see this as almost like a solution manual for insights. Um that your your platform is presenting. Um and another thing is in analogy to LLMs um we can probably train LLMs to be good at finding insights through reinforcement learning. And this also serves kind of like a manual solution manual for that. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Yeah, so one of the dreams that we have is that the platform once it's more developed will become that we [clears throat] can just let loose a reinforcement learning platform on. So, we just say here's a platform it's basically there's a sort of game. Here's a statement you need to prove. Can you reach the proof of that statement only using pointing and clicking on this platform? And I think that should be better um suited to reinforcement learning than just finding a proof because you have only a rather limited stock of moves at each stage as you will see in a minute. Um So, let me just uh quick hat um hat tip or big hat tip to Adam who's sitting here uh member of my group who's not quite single-handedly but because we have got some help from somebody called Leo Henchker in uh California. Um but has done all the kind of um coding or nearly all the coding for this platform. We've had um a lot of discussions about what it should be like uh including until around about well, there was a desperate discussion until around 1:00 last night &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; in order to sort of get the demos that I'm going to try and present working. Uh but I do want to stress that you know, it's likely there going to be glitches that you will see. Uh we hope that those will be ironed out before too long. And also sort of features that we would definitely want to have but don't yet have um So, it's absolutely very much sort of very preliminary prototype. Not everything working as it should. And one of the reasons that not everything is working as it should is that um some of the moves like what is a simple example of such and such are not things that are very easy to hard code. Uh so, basically the whole thing at the moment is driven by an element LLM in the background. And LLMs are sort of non-deterministic as I've found when I present saying the examples that I'm going to present. So, I think that's it for my slides. And now we'll move on to the fun and games. Um if I can find All right. Um let's new statement and I'll make that full screen. Okay. Um perhaps I can Okay. I'm letting you see some private information that I have a lot of open tabs. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Uh okay. So, this is not going to be a very deep theorem. I'm sorry about that but All right. An even number is a sum of two odd numbers. If you gave that to an undergraduate, they would &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; try me next year. So, &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; if you gave that to an undergraduate, they might think, "Yeah, okay, I've solved that problem. Take six, that's 3 + 3." Of course, when we see it, we understand that that relates to &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; every even number as a sum of two. And if I wanted to be really careful, that's what I would have written. But, actually, the system is good enough to understand what I want to mean. And it sets up I don't know how visible that is. I hope it's Can you Can you make it a bit more contrasty or a bit bigger or both? Uh The best I can do is I did this in another tool. I'll have to sort of switch around so that you &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Okay, so what's it done? It's just set things up. I've got an N, it's an integer. I could have made it a positive integer, um but then I'd have to sort of later on have to check that various things are greater than zero. So, that's just stating the fact. Hypothesis, it's even. We'd like to prove that we can find a pair of odd numbers that sum to that even number. I'm going to have to keep sort of moving from side to side. So, what am I going to do now? I'm going to sort of start by just tidying up the goals in a standard way. So, I select this whole statement here by clicking there. And I'll get some moves suggested to me, at least I hope I will. Peel existential quantified variable in the goal. That's going to take that Well, we'll see what happens. So, I'll go back to here. Uh that there exists A is going to vanish. And it's gone up into the top as a meta variable. That means that So, we've got an A sort of question mark by it, which means we're free to choose that A at some stage or at any stage if you want. So, I'll just quickly do the same with um with B. But, I'm free to take because it's driven. We are going to one of the sort of plans that we have is to automate some of these obviously automatable steps so that it'll be faster. Well, uh so what have I got here? I've got a conjunction of three things as the goal. It'd be nice to just have it as three separate goals. So, I'll split. By the way, over on the right, it just magically has what I want to do. It's because the LLM is sort of looking to see what can we do. And so, so far, there've been very few things that it's possible to do. And I've got three goals. Um What does an integer even even mean? Well, let's just find out. Uh I'll fold the definition. Uh it just means there's some number that doubles to it. Uh so, let's pick such a number. Oops, that's not a number. So, that We'll pick an example of such a number. Uh obtain a witness from an existential. I don't know what it would have done if I'd clicked on unfold the definition, but I don't want to go down that path. So, I've got a choice of two things, only one of which was sensible in that case, but that's evident. Yes. What's your LLM's vision for what it counts as a move versus, let's say, like an argument for a tactic in Lean? Like, it seems like they're quite related. Do you want to use smarter argument free tactics? Well, maybe we'll see some examples of that in a minute. I'm not quite sure I'm not a very I'm not a very Lean experienced person, but actually, here comes a more subtle step that is not absolutely definitely going to work. But, we see N = 2K up. Another point to make, there's a very obvious solution to this problem, which is take one and N - 1. I'm going to give a less obvious solution. I don't claim it's better. I'm choosing it just in order to demonstrate more of the facilities of this motivated proof facilitator. So, if I wanted to get uh if I wanted to get 1 and N - 1, then what I'd probably do at this stage would be to select A is odd. And just ask it, "What's the simplest example you know of an odd number?" And it would give me one, and that would turn out to determine what B had to be. I'd check that B was odd, and we'd be done. So, at the moment, actually, I think we I don't know, you can correct me on this. I think "Find the simplest example" thing is something we is is a move that we haven't yet uh it's not yet there, but it will be soon. Um So, instead, what I'm going to do is I'm going to select this hypothesis N = 2K and select the goal N = A + B. Uh Select it again. Sorry. I'll be all right. Um And I notice that they're sort of reasonably similar, but it would be nice if they could be even more similar. And there's a thing over here that says perform goal-directed forwards reasoning. So, the idea of this is, given any statement, there's usually a sort of cluster of closely related statements, equivalent statements, or things that are very obvious consequences. And goal-directed means we're going to try and choose a consequence of N = 2K that looks a bit more like N = A + B. I hope this will work. This one is So, here, the LLM is doing something a little bit less trivial and a little bit less mechanical. Let's see what it comes up with. Ah, it's come up with N = K + K. Exactly what we wanted. And now I'm going to So, it's going well so far. Uh over here. I'm going to close the goal with the hypothesis. I'm allowed to choose A and B. So, the fact that N = K + K uh will allow me to close this goal N = A + B. So, it's going to substitute uh K for You'll have an objection here. Don't express it just yet. So, I'm coming to it. So, I've got two goals that are the same. That's an extreme case where So, we just need to tidy things [clears throat] up a little bit. Solve one. I can deduce one from the other because they're the same. So, let's just tidy things up. &gt;&gt; [clears throat and cough] &gt;&gt; And now I'm stuck cuz there's absolutely no reason for for K to be odd. Um However, what we can say is, "I'm done unless K is odd." So, we're going to do a backtracking move at this stage, but it's not just pure backtracking. It's backtracking &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; um with extra information. So, I'm going to bring up something that's been hiding in the corner over here, the proof graph. This gives all the proof states with little bits of information about how they're related. If I hover over here, I don't have to click on it. Um there's some information which you can't read probably, but it it sort of explains the reasoning I had to get from one proof state to another. That's a very nice little feature. Uh let's just expand that up so I can I can't I can't see it either, but Uh so, let's go to the first point where K was introduced, which was here. I'm going to click on that. Or I'm going to right click. So, I control click. It says, "Backtrack [clears throat] to this proof with additional information." or to this proof state. So, the additional information is we're allowed to assume the negation of the goal that we had before, namely that uh K was odd. So, we're going to go back to here, and we'll have the additional um information that K is not odd. So, down here there's a new proof state, uh which will be our proof state when we look here. So, we've got we could afford, after the reasoning we did before, let's just expand that up again. We could afford to uh assume that K was odd because we were done if K Uh so, K is not odd because we were done if K was odd. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, the statement not K is odd is odd. So, let's uh ah That's slightly annoying. [snorts] So, I'm going Yeah, so All right, let's see whether that's This is a different way of getting &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; the result. So, I said let's see what it comes up with as a suggestion. Yeah, K is even. So, um Let's simplify that. There is also a move that says simplify, but uh I think in this case it probably thought this wasn't an algebraic simplification or something like that, so it it didn't offer it. Um And there are ways of overriding the platform. By the way, it's not even guaranteed that what it does is logically sound. This is I'm just anticipating a question that's bound to come up. We set it up so that we want it to be logically sound, but the key phrase here is it's a motivated proof facilitator. It's meant to make it easier for people to put things into the database, and that's the main priority. Um We would like somewhere further down the line to have something I mean, it should be that the output of this would be relatively easy to auto-formalize because it's only taking pretty small steps. So, it's just not something we've done at the moment, but uh a better version of this at some point in the future will have a guarantee of um soundness as well. Right. We've got K is even now. Uh I'm going to do some, I hope, goal-directed forwards reasoning towards A is odd. So, what what is what would what it would be asking is, you know, we've got an even number, we want an odd number. What could we do? Let's see what it comes up with. That was not what [snorts] we wanted. Uh So, I'm going to undo that. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Um And have another try. Sometimes just trying again does the job. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, that's the first proper glitch. Everything's worked pretty nicely up to this point. There we are. K + 1 is odd. Second time lucky. Uh and now let's use that uh K + 1 is odd to close this goal because remember A is I'm free to choose A. Close goal with hypothesis. We hope by the way that a future version of this will maybe sort of guess what you're going to do, store those guesses, and then when you do it, just do them instantly. So, we won't be be less waiting or sort of uh just think a couple of steps ahead. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; But uh all right. So, now um it's substituted K + 1 for A. Now I'm going to do something very standard. We've got um we've got um a variable that we want to choose and uh I think I've not quite selected everything I want to prove, so I haven't. Let's just There we are. So, I selected the variable B and this equality that contains B. So, you selected two things at once. Yes. Uh-huh. I've selected the variable and equality that contains it, and then it gives me the move isolate the selected variable. So, we we just want to we don't want to think about uh let's apply commutativity of addition and stuff like that. So, it's a sort of like a simple type thing. Um another thing I'm going to do is I'm going to take this variable and this equality here and um What have we got? First thing it suggests rewrite using equality results. It suggests a few other things which may be less helpful. And now this expression By the way, the redundant brackets there, that's to do with the fact that it's a remarkably remarkably difficult uh technical problem is how do you get LaTeX expressions to be selectable in a nice way? Uh subexpressions of LaTeX expressions. Um an undergraduate I want to mention called Thomas Tevenon came up with a solution. This is not actually LaTeX. It's something called Typst. Uh and using that and other things that I don't understand, uh Anand has got it to uh got it made made this So, this just this selecting thing I'm doing is highly nontrivial. I just wanted to Anyway. Let me just Okay. I may have got something Let's just see whether it works. Yeah. Um and now we're in pretty good shape. So, uh now I'm going to s- make a choice for B. So, if B equals K - 1 and I'm free to choose B, there's a fairly obvious choice of B. Uh So, let's just make that choice. We'll lose the second goal. And then we have K - 1 is odd as the uh final goal. And I don't know what will happen if I choose K + 1 is odd uh in order to get rid of K - 1 is odd. Um But I I just from past experience I know that if I choose K is even and K - 1 is odd, it's going to offer me So, we want to have a kind of situation where we don't want to get too worried about the very very low level stuff. And so, there's an option just to discharge something where it's it's completely obvious. We're interested in the the motivation for the ideas. If something's really obvious, then we don't need to motivate it, and so that's all sufficiently low level that we uh do that. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; And What happened there? Okay, let's just click. What happened? Oh, there we are. It says solved. Usually it has a sort of nice big box thing. So, that's finished that. And I've still got 15 minutes. I'm going to try a slightly more ambitious example now. Yes. I Yes, so these are definite issues. Uh you have ideas from some pictures that you've drawn or as you say from a sort of wrong proof that you So, it's not we haven't got the uh facility yet to do it, but um at some point we very much hope that um well, we we've got plans at least to support you try something, it doesn't work, you learn something from the [clears throat] failure that and then you feed that back in. You've got a bit more information you had before. That sort of iterative process. Um That's going to be a key part. It's not yet supported, but we won't sort of let it loose until that is supported. Um vague reasoning, that's more of a problem and uh one way you can get vagueness is by just su- sufficiently abstracting, and that covers a lot of cases of vagueness that you just look at something at a more abstract level. &gt;&gt; [cough] &gt;&gt; Uh and then you can be precise at a more abstract level, but I'm not sure whether it covers all cases. So, maybe that there will be some, you know, we won't be able to do absolutely everything on a platform like this. Uh yeah. There's a Hi. Uh you mentioned having it sort of try and guess what the the next step would be, and I think that's quite interesting from the perspective that reinforcement learning sometimes has an issue that there's a whole chain of reasoning, and then you either reward the whole chain is satisfied the whole chain, whereas doing it like this, you can potentially do reinforcement learning That's a very interesting point. That's a very interesting point. That's a um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Yeah. Another thing to say actually another thing to say but we're going to have sort of composite moves. So, a lot of the time I've done things like peeling quantifiers and removing conjunctions and so on. All that comes into [clears throat] the sort of category of general sort of tidying up. And uh we don't want to make people do all that tidying up all the time. So, at some point we'll just have a sort of tidy button that will do that. Um But that's not the the deeper point you're making at all. So, there's lots of questions on me, but uh maybe if I could have at least 10 minutes to this No, no, no. I mean we we So, I guess 2 and 1/2 minutes for some more questions. I was just wondering then how do you actually decide what the possible next moves are like here? Is it sort of the what you I think you called move oriented? Like that kind of ask thanks the question what are the moves? What are the allowed moves that you can play? And for like the more complex the problems are going to get that you want to Yes. So, they're not going to be just sort of objectively correct. There's not going to be sort of choice of So, we have to look at what we do and the the I I I can tell you what the qualities are that we look for in a move. Qualities are one that they sort of do things to be things that people do a lot. Another is they should be as general and domain independent as possible. So, sort of domain specific heuristics, we want to have those as uh things that sort of we sort of think of as living in a library [clears throat] and get sort of called up um by the other The library is sort of what the other LM knows type of thing. Um we don't want to build those in as &gt;&gt; hard as concrete moves because somehow then it feels as though that would be a way of just building in a lot of stuff that's not so motivated. Uh so, generality is very important, and um probably some other things that I'm not immediately thinking of, but there's some other qualities that we would like to have. Just to follow up to that point, I mean in the earlier from my point if you want to apply reinforcement learning, the question is what is the action space? Yeah. What are the possible So, what I the way I see the action space is the platform presents you with a choice of a handful, very small handful sometimes, but maybe usually no more than maybe two or three [clears throat] moves, and you just choose one. Uh so, so that's another way of thinking about what the what this motivated proof facilitator is. It's a way of reducing the action space from almost infinite, where you sort of have to produce some magical object that has all sorts of properties and so on, down to something finite. Um and that's why we think that it might be well suited to uh reinforcement learning. At some stage in the future. We're not ready for that yet, but I hope it will be somewhere down the line. Okay, so uh I may need Anand to start proof, right? Here I want to prove that a metric space, every metric space is Hausdorff. Um I've made a start on this already, but only I've sort of just um done all the kind of tidying steps at the beginning. I sort of unfolded the definition of is Hausdorff and all sorts of quantifiers and so on. So, let's just summarize the situation so far. We've got an X that belongs to some metric space capital X. We've got a Y. Uh we've got a we're trying to find, that's what this question mark is, we're trying to find a subset of X and another subset of X. Uh the hypotheses that we have are that uh this function D is a metric on X and that X doesn't equal Y, and we want U to be open, V to be open, X being U, Y to be in V, and U intersect V to be the empty set. Uh so, you can imagine I sort of get to that fairly quickly, but it's a little bit tedious uh until we have this global tidying move set up, which we don't yet. So, I'm now going to um select the I look at X is in U and U is open in um capital X, and uh those two go rather nicely together. So, I confirm the main I'm not going to select anything else. We'll come back to what happens when you do that. Cuz I'll generate some suggestions. What are some things that we could uh get out of that? And here, by the way, it's much more likely that things are going to go not quite right. Um Especially good. I hope [clears throat] this won't take too long. All right, here we go. All right, that So, it's told me that uh I've got a open ball around X that's contained in U. Um I'm allowed to uh So, it says replace goal with an equivalent statement. So, if I know that X is in U, then the goal X is in U is equivalent to the statement that there is a open ball around uh X is implies it, and it obviously is implied by it. So, I hope, but I'm not absolutely sure, that this is just going to replace the X is in U. Now, it's done that, and it's done something it shouldn't have done. We've lost the goal that U should be open. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; But, that's just a a bug that uh needs to be sorted out. Uh so, I'll have to we'll witness the same bug happening with V. Um Let's just try that, then. Um oh. Yeah. Uh So, we can maybe get rid of the second one. All right. Oh, I see what's happened. Yes, okay, I I understand what you're saying. So, now I'm going to make an additional selection. Oh, no, I haven't I've got that wrong, haven't I made it a main selection again. So, I confirm the main selections. The additional context is uh you sort of The the the I I well, it won't be quite so clear um what that means with this example, so I think I won't say anything about it. I'll just uh We should get a similar suggestion. Uh Right, we've got what we wanted. This We've ended up we will not have uh destroyed the the is open goal there. Let's see what happens. Yeah. Okay, so it's a bit I we should have U as open as well, but uh to save time, I'm not going Slightly unfortunate that we've got the same letter R twice, but it doesn't matter too much because the next thing I'm going to do is uh peel those to [cough] variables. Uh So, there's a we we get to choose an R at some point. And [clears throat] so, this one we'll give it a different name when I peel it. And as well as waiting for that, let's just think what we're going to do next. Um Right. Now, the key thing I want to emphasize here as I'm just going to do something. Let's let's call it R1. So, we've got R and R1. I'm This custom move thing is a sort of override facility. I'm going to say rename R1 to S. Just cuz it'll be nicer to have an S. Uh oops. There we are. Let's call it S now. Uh so, S is to be chosen. So, the The key thing with this is if you're doing point and click, you want to generate the answer without ever having to type in um let's pick two open balls [clears throat] of half the distance to the radius half the distance between these two points. Um That's the challenge. If you want to get it through this sort of motivated proof facilitator game, you want to produce the example without typing anything. Well, we've got a got a reasonable way along with this process. We've got we've got a ball of radius R and a ball of radius S just just by sort of exploring what it means for U to be open and contain X and Y to be open and contain Y. We took some obvious So, now I'm in a position to take this Oh, I I'm sorry, I have to do a little because of this um types business, I I have to do a tiny little bit of editing to add the redundant brackets that I talked about earlier. Um Where's it gone? Getting it to scroll down. Oh, it's better. Okay, so I'm going to edit the statement BRX is contained in U, but so I have this does look suspic suspiciously like typing, but I hope you will forgive this instance of it. I claim I'm not really cheating. And I'll do the same for BSY when I edit You probably can't see what I'm doing, but I'm just &gt;&gt; [cough] &gt;&gt; I'm just &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; adding in some redundant brackets so I'll be able to make the right selections for this move. You could also add back U is open just for if you wanted. Niceness. That's a good idea. Uh Yeah. I could add a nice suggestion. U is open [clears throat] in X B. I hope that will There's another distance. Oh, yes, so that's what it's supposed to be called. Uh U. We've got 3 minutes. I'll go as far as I can. So, I'm I'm I'm not going to finish this, but I hope I'll be able to um get to the point where I can just say what would would happen if I continued. So, &gt;&gt; um but I I do want to do one more step. Uh I'm going to select U. Now I can select BRX, which I wasn't able to before. Uh and let's just see whether it suggests anything. Instantiate metavariable with selected expression. So, the key thing is I can now say let let U be this with I've sort of magically produced just by sort of some reasoning process an open set. Maybe I can try that. So, the one rule is it doesn't it counts as motivated if you just try something that's already present in the proof state. So, we will do that uh because it's sort of there's no mystery about how you thought of it. You thought of it because it was there, something to try, and there weren't very many other things to try. And so, it's now instantiated U with that. I think we can uh allow ourselves one more step. Um discharge obviously true goal. Uh we don't want to spend ages proving that a set is a subset of itself. Uh I will now just do one more thing that points the way forwards, and then I'll have to stop and just tell you what happens if you if you carry on. So, I've got the D is a metric and X doesn't equal Y, and I'll make those my suggested main selection. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; I want to generate some suggestions. The It should suggest that uh my you know, so the the distance is positive. So, if I select that, if I add that to the hypotheses, and right, I will stop now. Um what happens if you carry on? Well, we can unfold the definition of uh um Uh you end up needing that uh BRX intersect BS of X or BS of Y, I mean, uh is empty. Once you've If you then do a sort of proof by negation move, you get that it's non-empty. You get that there is some Z that belongs to the two things. You unfold, you get the distance from X to Z is less than R, the distance from Y to Z is less than S. But you've already got this dxy thing. If you do some goal-directed forwards reasoning towards dxy or sort of suggestions move, then it says, "Hey, if I use a triangle inequality there, I will generate the term dxy." Uh so, [clears throat] it does that, gets that dxy is less than R + S. Then you can instantiate S with R. So, you then you uh have you're saying in math in human terms, you might as well take S and R to be equal. Uh do a bit of rearranging, and then you get that if it's um if they're equal to uh dxy over two, you can get the contradiction that you're looking for. So, you can get through to the end, but I'm out of time. Uh so, I will stop there. Uh but I just wanted to stress the answer came purely by pointing and clicking. different Um and what we're hoping is that this will be Let's say this will happen with much more complicated proofs once the platform is up and running. It's quite a challenging project to get that to to to to to work, but um this is just this is this is where we are now. So, thank you very much. &gt;&gt; [applause] &gt;&gt; We've already had lots of questions, but any more? Uh sorry, this is a fairly long and open-ended discussion, &gt;&gt; but then I'm very interested in your perspective. Um a number of years ago you wrote this influential essay on the two cultures of mathematics. And quite interested in what you think about the way this kind of machinery will impact what you believe to be the two cultures. I don't necessarily agree with the distinction that Um in particular, to make it relevant to the topic today, if I recall what you write there, you used this notion of homology as a kind of litmus test dividing the two cultures. And the nature of your argument in the language you are using today is that homology in some sense for you will never be motivated. It's almost like that. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I wonder if you could comment on this. Well, I'll just make a very quick comment. That's not something I believe &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I I don't believe that of anything really. I I think everything was discovered somehow. So, it must have been motivated somehow. But sometimes the motivation can be very sort of indirect, but uh maybe it's sort of there's not a motivated path to solving this problem, but there's a much more sort of roundabout path where this problem just is stubbornly open. But there was a sort of motivated path for doing something else, and then something else here unblocked whatever you needed for this problem, which you'd never have thought of if you hadn't been thinking about something quite else uh over there. Um it's very important that that those kinds of phenomena are taken into account. I I don't want to claim that for each isolated proof there must be a motivated version. I think sometimes um that's not true. A motivational version it can says take a huge step back, invent a massive chunk of mathematics, and then come back to the problem you started with. I I don't know. Yeah. And that's problematic in some way, but I'm still curious. Do you feel like say AI in proofs or AI in general will impact your two cultures in Well, Yeah, I think it is possible that the kinds of thing that we're building here will work much better for one culture than for another. Partly because necessarily I and the people in my group will have much less insight into how people come up with proofs in areas that we know nothing about. So, I absolutely don't rule out that the best that we'll we'll end up with is something that can be a motivated proof. So, that's the thing that but that's doesn't really work very well if you're an algebraic number theorist or something like that. Or differential geometry, but it works quite well if you want to do an IMO problem or um or something in combinatorics. Uh analysis or something. Question at the back. Um I want to ask again about this idea of missing steps in proofs. Um so, like humans have developed this way of writing maths, right? And as you point out, it can leave out a lot of steps, and that can be quite brutal to students and all kinds of things, but on the other hand, there might also be reasons for it. So, it can be sort of efficient. And also, I think maybe some of the other questions were touching on this idea that sometimes leaving out steps can also facilitate uh insight or creativity in the same way, and the process of sort of figuring that out is very important. So, I I guess I just wanted to ask, can that be relevant in the AI case? So, could there be a situation where it's actually better not to know those vague proofs too much for the AIs to develop the kind of intuition that humans have for for generating mathematical ideas? I mean, in in real life That's an interesting point. I I I Yeah, I don't rule that out. I mean, it's possible that that is already happening to some extent with AI, that the AIs sort of building up experience in the sort of way that uh humans do. Yeah, I mean, I there's a sort of notorious well, famous case in in my field that uh one way of really making progress as a PhD student is to pick a random paper of Jean Bourgain and really read it &gt;&gt; until you understand it properly. Because he left so so many lines in the paper &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; that it forces you to think really hard and not just accept the argument passively. More details are always good. I mean, you can always fill them out. Yeah, so I I think there's always going to be a place for this, and there may be a place for not having it as well. Yeah. Um you mentioned sort of using these proofs to help train LLMs. Have you thought about potentially inputting incorrect motivated proofs in the sense that the steps seem motivated, but then in that particular case with that particular problem, something subtle goes wrong. And presumably that might be helpful training data because it um sort of I it influences that thinking that that even though it didn't work for this problem, that might be a good way for you to approach this in in in general to learn those techniques. Yeah, we haven't thought about that, but [snorts] I think that is potentially interesting. And a related thing that I think we we have thought about is um putting in things that don't fully solve problems. So, &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; maybe you have a research-level problem that's open. And what you put in the database is not a solution to that problem, but it's a sort of a whole collection of observations that an experienced mathematician would naturally make in response to that initial problem and reductions and transformations and lemmas that might be useful and things like that. I think having a database of that shows how people approach hard problems um even when they don't fully solve them would be pretty useful as well. Because I think that's something that LLMs still seem to be not that impressive at. If you just give them an open problem and say, "Do you have any ideas?" they tend to have rather superficial or not very helpful ideas, but maybe if one had a database of the sorts that we're looking [clears throat] for when we're asking for some helpful ideas, it could be useful. One last question. Right. I was wondering if you had a problem a sort of difficult frontier problem, as you said earlier, that that you consider that is closed, that has a proof, but you consider unmotivated. And that you would like to see sort of one day uh be done this way. I've thought about that. So, if we if this gets if this takes off, then I think we will want to uh have things like sort of prizes for the first person who manages to get this proof through the uh proof verifier. And an example of a candidate such proof, is um the solution to the cap set problem, which was apparently in additive combinatorics, where there's this idea that came out of nowhere. It didn't really come out of nowhere, but nobody paid any attention, but anyway, of using polynomials in a in a clever way. It was a proof that was totally on different lines from anything anybody had been using to try and uh make progress on that problem. Once you've seen it, the proof is really short and simple and can be presented in uh probably a an hour's lecture or two. Um Well, I I have lectured it several times. Um so, that's a nice example of sort of here's the original problem, how would anyone have thought of using polynomials to solve it? Uh and I don't know the answer. So, one of the first things I would do with that is just write to the people who did think of using polynomials, which actually is a slightly complicated story because they the initial people solved a slightly different problem that was closely related, and then other people noticed that the methods they used could in fact be transferred to the original problem. So, there's um I do have other examples as well, but that was just one just to prove that I have an example. Hey, well, let's thank Tim for
