AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society
AMS Website Down
Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm.
PDFLINK
Education
Multiplying Impact and Expanding Reach: Ideas and Reflections from Outreach at the University of Melbourne
Paul Fijn
Cindy Huang
Susan James
Dominic Maderazo
Cait Pryse
Communicated by
Notices
Associate Editor Yvonne Lai
Each year thousands of school students from across Australia and New Zealand engage in outreach activities run by the University of Melbourne’s School of Mathematics and Statistics. With our team of five members (the authors of this paper), we maintain two flagship programs: the Micro Mathematicians program, an array of workshops run as interactive incursions and events throughout the year; and the Mathematics and Statistics Research Challenge, an annual competition. They both aim to give young people, 10 years old and up, a window into the work of (living!) mathematicians and statisticians. We’d like to share some of the lessons we’ve learned from running these programs and establishing a dedicated outreach team, in the hope that these practical tips might be useful to others interested in expanding mathematics outreach efforts at their university.
Figure 1
.
Dominic Maderazo leads a discussion with students eager to share ideas.
1
.
Micro Mathematicians Workshops
Micro Mathematicians is an enrichment program that introduces students to topics they might otherwise not be exposed to in their regular schooling. Students participate in hands-on collaborative workshops that value communication and exploration over speed and correctness. Most commonly, the program is delivered as a 90-minute session for 20–40 students, in the form of school incursions during terms, and either virtually or on-campus during school holidays. Each year we have close to 2000 students participate.
We always team-teach, providing flexibility for us and opportunities for more discussions with students. We use inexpensive manipulatives such as pipe cleaners, tokens and name tags, and our activities are all designed to have a low floor and high ceiling, to avoid relying on prerequisite knowledge while still challenging even advanced students. The structure of our workshops has found a regular rhythm with an introduction, quickly followed by a hands-on activity, then a facilitated discussion, more cycles of activities and discussions as time allows, and then a conclusion with key takeaway messages. While following this regular rhythm, each presentation of a workshop is different and we encourage improvisation, adjusting to our audience, and allowing the lead presenter to bring their individuality and passion.
Our workshops use creative approaches to incorporate often complex mathematics reserved for university-level. Here are some examples:
Nim
Students explore the combinatorial game of Nim
BCG82
, ultimately leading to understanding the optimal strategy and the mathematics underlying it. Pairs of students are given a handful of small objects and start by playing the game with 3 piles. Next, students are encouraged to share their ideas and strategies for winning, which we record as suggestions to test (e.g., “Does the first player always win?”, “perhaps you should balance the piles”). They then record their moves in tables, and we explore the underlying mathematics and teach them the winning strategy.
Infinities
Participants are given a name tag with a prewritten decimal on the tag. After building up to Cantor’s diagonal counting argument, each group of 4–6 students forms a line, ordering themselves by their name tags (“list,” lowest to highest). They then work together to calculate a new number, which will be almost the same as one students’ number (differing only in one digit) and compare their name tag number with the new number calculated. This gets students engaging socially, moving physically, and visualizing why everyone’s number cannot be the same as the new number generated.
Skeletons
This workshop is based on a recent research paper
ATBR
22
$^{+}$
, with the end goal of developing appreciation of the research question and result, as well as raising awareness that mathematics research is still happening. This optimization problem is seeking more efficient (fewer lines) representations of polygonal obstacles, for example when optimizing underground networks with below-ground obstacles. Students draw solutions for trivial cases (regular and irregular polygons up to octagons). We discuss features they notice, often highlighting the difference between convex and concave vertices, or introducing connectedness. Some groups realize a preliminary result.
Figure 2
.
We use inexpensive manipulatives for hands-on activities.
Figure 3
.
Students can play Nim by taking turns drawing from one of three piles.
Figure 4
.
A corkboard with a real rogaining (competitive form of orienteering) map for hands-on exploration of an optimization problem.
We are continuously improving our workshops and designing new ones. Recently we reached 30 different topics, including optimization, bijections, fractal dimensions, aperiodic tiling, origami geometry, modular arithmetic, and neural networks. For anyone wanting to implement a program like this, here are our tips:
Go wide on topics
While programs like this can be an opportunity to promote the mathematics being done at your institution, they can be stifled if limited to only promoting the mathematics being done at one institution. School students will benefit from the widest view of mathematics you can provide and the most interesting activities you can come up with, so more autonomy for the people seeing the reactions of kids day-to-day has worked well for us.
Meet the students at their level
As grownups, particularly ones that work in mathematics, we can project our experience of mathematics onto young people and forget how the thing that we love can be difficult for those who are still learning. Government-published curriculum documents are comprehensive and detailed in Australia, and are useful but imperfect guides to students’ mathematical knowledge and abilities. If students can explain their thinking to the class, that can build some shared language to start from, rather than starting with our mathematical terminology, which can be precise but inaccessible.
Print templates
Printouts allow students to spend more time recording and analyzing, rather than drawing neat tables, graphs or diagrams. For Skeletons, we provide printouts with simple regular and irregular polygons for students to sketch on. For Nim, we hand out preprinted tables for students to track their moves in binary. Tables also help students jump into binary representation quickly, regardless of prior knowledge.
Manipulatives are great
Playing with objects or drawings helps students to quickly start exploring new mathematical concepts and invites them to use gesturing when they don’t yet have the terminology to describe their ideas. Quiet manipulatives are even better! We started running Nim with marble-like pebbles and found the clatter to be too distracting so found small, softer objects to use instead.
Discussions are adaptable
We have found we can adapt many of our workshops for different age groups and prior knowledge levels by keeping the activity the same, and using questioning and discussion to vary the depth of explanation and mathematics concepts explored. For example, we have run Nim with students in the age range of 10–16 years, Infinities with 15–18 year olds, and Skeletons with 10–18 year olds.
Be flexible with details
When putting a workshop together, the team will have a goalpost of where we might be able to get to, with multiple possible exit points. For example, we might aim for a general proof of a result but instead prove only a special case or even only get as far as applying the result to several examples.
Notice excitement and pride
If you’re unsure what will interest students, try a few things out! For example, teachers liked our slides about the network optimization applications in Skeletons, but students got really excited by the geometric figures from the academic paper; a slide showing a concave shape with ten thousand sides has been met with audible gasps! We realized many have experienced a world of geometry largely limited to regular convex polygons. We also saw how proud some students were when they came up with a creative design, so while the research paper focuses on developing a canonical form, we allow time for students to discover the variety of possibilities.
Figure 5
.
School students learn about the mathematics of juggling at the university campus.
2
.
Mathematics and Statistics Research Challenge
The Mathematics and Statistics Research Challenge started in 2021, to provide a different experience for school-aged students. Most students only had experience of exam- or olympiad-style competitions; this provided them with a long-term, collaborative, investigation experience closer to the activity of research mathematics. This also provided an opportunity for more gender diversity in participants, as we knew traditional competitions were more commonly recommended to male students
Ste19
. It is in the spirit of an undergraduate research project where the goal is developing research skills and communication over progress and results, with over 500 entries each year from Australia, New Zealand, and the Asia Pacific region.
At the start of each year we brainstorm and write research prompts. Other faculty members from the School of Mathematics and Statistics are encouraged to submit ideas. Then we select and edit prompts for that year, collating them into booklets for each age category. Students select a topic from the 6–10 options written for their age group, and work on the projects mostly or entirely outside of school hours. After spending up to four months working on a project, the best submissions are invited to the finals event. Students give a presentation of their project, judged by academics within the School of Mathematics and Statistics. Having on-the-spot questions functions as a useful way to distinguish how much students really understand the topic they have researched. It is also a great opportunity for them to experience a taste of academic mathematics at an event not dissimilar to a research conference.
The program is designed around some guiding principles:
Design for choice
Providing both a range of questions/topics and ways to engage (written report, poster, video, short slide deck).
Aim for participation
Some questions provided to students are deliberately accessible for students with a range of mathematics backgrounds and abilities.
Provide for extension
All questions have scope to be extended in interesting and mathematically rich ways. Students are invited to try forming their own questions and explore their topic in a self-directed way.
Scaffold
Supporting the aim for participation, questions guide students to understand the unfamiliar concepts and definitions, suggesting ways to approach the early stages of the research process.
Foster teamwork
Students are encouraged to work in teams of up to three, supported by the prize structure (awarded to a team, with amounts calculated on a per student rather than a per team basis).
Minimal teacher input
Knowing how much is already asked of school teachers, we only request that they sign a form stating that they believe the work to be the students’ own, and do not require any substantial time input from them. In response to questions about how best to support students when teachers don’t know the answers themselves, we have provided guidance and some resources for supervising research projects
Fij25
.
Here are some examples of project topics that demonstrate these principles:
Knight’s tours
A Senior (15–18 year olds) question in 2023 started with exploring how a knight moves in chess, and whether or not it is possible to reach every square of a standard chessboard. A suggested extension led to exploring what happens when there is a section missing from the center of the board. One student took this and explored a range of different boards, and she proved results by separating the boundaries (internal, around the hole; and external, near the edge of the board) from the bulk to prove a range of results based on a generic
$m\times n$
board with an
$a\times b$
hole.
Triangular digits
A Junior (10–12 year olds) question in 2024 explored repeated sums (modulo 10) for finite sequences until a single digit is reached (described in age-appropriate terms, alongside an example, and called a “triangular digit”). Some students used a spreadsheet with conditional formatting (familiar to students from the Australian curriculum) to color-code cells and identify some patterns, which they then explored further.
3
.
Multiplying Impact: A Dedicated Outreach Team
Our work as a team began with one person, Dr. Susan James. She was hired in 2019, in an outreach coordination role in the School of Mathematics and Statistics, with a significant teaching responsibility. Dr. James, with her comprehensive experience in both managing national outreach programs and teaching at secondary schools, was an excellent fit for this position. Capitalizing on Dr. James’s leadership skills and experience, and strong candidates with different skills and experience, there was an opportunity to expand outreach beyond what one person could manage. The leadership in the School of Mathematics and Statistics decided to establish a dedicated outreach team. Two additional people were hired: Dr. Sam Povall and Dr. Paul Fijn. Povall was hired primarily to work on programs for high-achieving students, having a strong background in this area from the UK. Fijn was hired for his university teaching and experience in wellbeing and mentoring roles.
Over time, the team has expanded, often through part-time appointments which later expanded. This included Hayley Ellul in 2020, who brought experience teaching elementary school children. In 2021, Dr. Cindy Huang and Dominic Maderazo joined the team, as Povall and Ellul had moved on. Huang brought a background in engineering education and outreach program evaluation, Maderazo came from a mathematical biology background and high school teaching. In 2023 Cait Pryse, with a background in mathematics education and learning design, joined the team.
The initial three team members took roles based on their strengths and interests: Dr. James in driving large-scale programs with a strong focus on equity and reaching students from a wide variety of backgrounds; Dr. Sam Povall in developing new holiday programs and support for high-achieving students; and Dr. Paul Fijn maintaining a connection between outreach and education-focused academics within the School of Mathematics and Statistics. Previously, mathematics and statistics outreach activities had been sporadic and entirely dependent on passionate individuals squeezing in small amounts of time around their research roles. With two team members becoming full-time outreach staff, the scope of outreach was able to become much more ambitious.
Figure 6
.
Dr. Fijn discussing mathematics with students at their table groups.
4
.
Expanding Reach
4.1
.
Growing the team
Gradually increasing the size of the team is one way we have multiplied our impact. New team members are required to have expertise and experience in both mathematics and education, as well as being highly capable communicators. With a broad suite of programs, the team all need to learn and deliver content outside their field of expertise and connect with a wide variety of audiences: children must find them energizing, teenagers need to find them interesting, and teachers need to respect their teaching. Now with five members, the team as a whole incorporates a range of academic backgrounds, fields of study, and other life experiences. Having a diversity of expertise and experiences is immensely valuable in connecting with a wide variety of students, teachers, and people. It also allows us to act as living proof to our program participants that there isn’t just one type of “maths person.”
We are fortunate to have a well-resourced School of Mathematics and Statistics, which can cover the salary costs of employing an outreach team. Staff time to develop and run programs is the main cost, with some budget for larger events (public lectures, award ceremonies, and prizes), and modest (often reusable) workshop materials. Obtaining external funding is certainly beneficial, although it is not imperative. Continuing support from our leadership has been vital, and we are proud of their vision: the benefits of outreach can be substantial, but they are not easily attributed or even recognizable in the short term. Deputy Head of School, Associate Professor Marcy Robertson explains her perspective:
“As a public institution, a university has a core responsibility to engage meaningfully with the broader community, and outreach is one of the most powerful ways to do this. It builds public interest and trust in our discipline, opens pathways into higher education for students from underrepresented backgrounds, and brings long-term strategic benefits such as widening participation and deepening societal appreciation for mathematics. For the University of Melbourne, one of Australia’s leading Schools of Mathematics and Statistics, investing in a dedicated outreach team is a natural choice.
“Moreover, outreach allows students, the public, and academics alike to reconnect with the joy and creativity that first drew us to mathematics. It’s a way to make the subject feel welcoming, surprising, and full of possibility—for everyone.”
4.2
.
Inviting people to get involved
Getting more people involved in outreach has a lot of benefits. Good fun has serious value; the boosts to morale, wellbeing, cohesion, belonging, and retention should not be underestimated. It is also a great way to keep expanding the reach of your outreach activities. We continue to look for ways to involve more faculty members, as well as undergraduate and postgraduate students, in all our outreach programs.
Having programs already running helps lowers the barrier to getting involved in outreach in the first place, reducing the workload and stress of event management. We have curated a variety of opportunities for other faculty members to get involved with outreach activities, allowing individuals to engage in a way that suits them and best sets them up for success. This includes more traditional activities like public lectures, but also a wider variety of options: they could help us develop a new workshop, they could be profiled in a workshop, they could contribute a question for our research challenge, they could help edit the questions, mark the submissions, or judge the finalist presentations. Rather than push everyone to talk to any audience, we make it possible for individuals to choose how they want to get involved, whether that’s up-front-and-center or behind-the-scenes input.
Current undergraduate and postgraduate students are invited to participate through volunteering for our School Outreach Ambassador Program. Based on their skills and interests, Ambassadors are offered opportunities to contribute to outreach activities such as assisting workshop facilitators, running maths games on the university Open Day (an annual day for prospective students to meet staff, explore the campus and learn about the University and its programs), and contributing to research project marking. Prior to joining an activity led by the outreach team, Ambassadors receive training (primarily in the form of resources and briefings) specific to the task. For example, every research project is marked by two to three different people, so we invite Student Ambassadors to volunteer to mark the projects, while also making sure each project will always be marked by a staff member as well. Including Ambassadors in our workshops, where they introduce themselves and their area of mathematics, extends our ability to provide diverse representation for school students and opportunities for our audiences to see themselves in someone that loves mathematics. Opportunities like this are a great way for Student Ambassadors to better their communication and leadership skills while at the same time working on meaningful community engagement together and strengthening their connections to the School of Mathematics and Statistics.
Figure 7
.
Associate Professor Joyce Zhang (with Associate Professor Marcy Robertson and Dr. Volker Schlue) joins in the Finals event of the Mathematics and Statistics Research Challenge as part of the judging panel.
5
.
Sustaining Impact: What is Outreach?
Even with a dedicated team, student volunteers, and more faculty members getting involved, we have more demand than we can meet. To be sustainable, we have found it helpful to be clear about how we define outreach and why we do it.
To help us decide what to say no to, we try to narrow our focus and avoid duplicating activities that are commonly available elsewhere. For this reason, we have focused on raising awareness of mathematics and statistics outside the school curriculum, including current research, rather than curriculum-aligned resources. We also try to directly address misconceptions and myths that surround mathematical work. For example, we highlight the role of collaboration and creativity in mathematics: while traditional classroom mathematics tends to be solitary and focused on using the correct method or finding the unique solution, our programs encourage teamwork and exploring ideas, and valuing a variety of approaches to a problem.
Interacting with partners and stakeholders helps us understand our unique contributions within the broader education ecosystem. Even within our university, there are other outreach activities and student recruitment staff members that are engaging with young people and school teachers. For example, Faculty of Science outreach programs advertised primarily to science teachers, who usually have minimal contact or collaboration with mathematics teachers in Australian high schools. Awareness of these limitations enables us to focus on those who are more likely to be interested in programs specific to mathematics and statistics. Our idea of outreach is that it has broader aims than student recruitment: our goal is fostering an appreciation of, and encouraging students to enjoy and study more mathematics and statistics. This freedom enables us to work with children too young to be considered “prospective students” but at key points in their development which might impact their attitudes towards mathematics and statistics.
Figure 8
.
Dr. Huang captivates an audience with mathematics at a Melbourne bar.
6
.
What’s Next?
Our team and outreach activities continues to grow and shift, adapting to new challenges, and taking up new opportunities. In 2025 we held ELI5 (“explain like I’m five”), a public communications challenge for some of our university Student Ambassadors to present a mathematics concept to an audience of interested school students and parents. As a way to engage adult audiences with current research mathematics, we transformed a workshop topic into a puzzle-based article
PR25
. The team have also delivered professional development for teachers, with future programs planned, and are exploring other external partnership opportunities. Already we have the delight of welcoming previous participants from our programs returning as undergraduates, and volunteering as Student Ambassadors, and we hope to see this continue in the next five years.
We hope that our reflections have broadened your imagination of what outreach can look like and that you may even consider starting a team in your university. Even just one person, given the chance to dedicate their time to outreach, can exponentially increase the impact and sustainability of outreach activities, creating more opportunities for staff and students to get involved. Perhaps you could begin with a look at the enthusiastic people, exciting activities, and interesting resources already in your organisation or local region and consider some creative possibilities for scaling up those outreach activities. Bridging the gap between university mathematics and statistics and the school communities that are so eager to engage, benefits everyone.
If this is something you’re interested in, or if you’d like to know more about what we’re doing, feel free to email us:
[email protected]
. We’re always excited to talk with others that share our enthusiasm for education and outreach!
References
[
ATBR
22
]
$^{+}$
Nicolau Andrés-Thió, Marcus Brazil, Charl Ras, Doreen Thomas, and Marcus Volz,
An exact algorithm for constructing minimum Euclidean skeletons of polygons
, J. Global Optim.
83
(2022), no. 1, 137–162, DOI
10.1007/s10898-021-01101-3
. MR
4411758
,
AMSref
\bib{MR4411758}{article}{
author={Andr\'{e}s-Thi\'{o}, Nicolau},
author={Brazil, Marcus},
author={Ras, Charl},
author={Thomas, Doreen},
author={Volz, Marcus},
title={An exact algorithm for constructing minimum Euclidean skeletons of polygons},
journal={J. Global Optim.},
volume={83},
date={2022},
number={1},
pages={137--162},
issn={0925-5001},
review={\MR {4411758}},
doi={10.1007/s10898-021-01101-3},
}
[
BCG82
]
Elwyn R. Berlekamp, John H. Conway, and Richard K. Guy,
Winning ways for your mathematical plays. Vol. 1
:
Games in general
, Academic Press, Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers], London-New York, 1982. MR
654501
,
AMSref
\bib{MR654501}{book}{
author={Berlekamp, Elwyn R.},
author={Conway, John H.},
author={Guy, Richard K.},
title={Winning ways for your mathematical plays. Vol. 1},
subtitle={Games in general},
publisher={Academic Press, Inc. [Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers], London-New York},
date={1982},
pages={xxxi+426+xi},
isbn={0-12-091150-7},
review={\MR {654501}},
}
[
Fij25
]
P. Fijn,
Conducting mathematics research
, April 24, 2025,
https://ms.unimelb.edu.au/engage/outreach/mathematics-and-statistics-research-challenge/resources/conducting-mathematics-research
.
[
PR25
]
C. Pryse and C. Ras,
Pursuit: Can you solve the skeleton puzzle?
, July 15, 2025,
https://pursuit.unimelb.edu.au/articles/can-you-solve-the-skeleton-puzzle
.
[
Ste19
]
A. M. Steegh,
Gender differences in mathematics and science competitions: A systematic review
, Journal of Research in Science Teaching
56
(2019), no. 10, 1431–1460.
Paul Fijn is a lecturer (teaching and outreach) at the University of Melbourne. His email address is
[email protected]
.
Cindy Huang is an outreach fellow at the University of Melbourne. Her email address is
[email protected]
.
Susan James is a senior outreach fellow at the University of Melbourne. Her email address is
[email protected]
.
Dominic Maderazo was an outreach fellow at the University of Melbourne.
Cait Pryse is an outreach officer at the University of Melbourne. Her email address is
[email protected]
.
Article DOI:
10.1090/noti3322
Credits
Figures
1
–
6
and Figure
8
are courtesy of the authors.
Figure
7
photograph by Gayle Ponje is courtesy of the University of Melbourne.
Photos of Paul Fijn, Cindy Huang, Susan James, and Dominic Maderazo are courtesy of University of Melbourne.
Photo of Cait Pryse is courtesy of Cait Pryse.