Announcement of The Shaw Laureates 2026
Accessibility Statement
Skip Navigation
HONG KONG
,
May 27, 2026
/PRNewswire/ --
The Shaw Prize in Astronomy
is awarded in equal shares to
Continue Reading
The Shaw Laureates 2026 (from left to right): Ken’ichi Nomoto and Stanford Woosley, The Shaw Prize in Astronomy; Anne Dejean, Hugues de Thé and Zhu Chen, The Shaw Prize in Life Science and Medicine; Emmanuel Candès and Camillo De Lellis, The Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences.
Ken'ichi Nomoto
Emeritus Professor and Visiting Senior Scientist of the Kavli Institute for the Physics and Mathematics of the Universe, University of Tokyo, Japan and
Stanford Woosley
Professor of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
for their studies of stellar explosions and the origin of the elements.
The Shaw Prize in Life Science and Medicine
is awarded in equal shares to
Anne Dejean
Professor Emerita, Institut Pasteur, France
Hugues de Thé
Professor and Chair of Cellular and Molecular Oncology, Collège de France and
Zhu Chen
Professor, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, PRC
for the discovery of the molecular and cellular bases of acute promyelocytic leukemia and the pioneering of a synergistic targeted therapy that transformed the disease from one of the most deadly to one of the most curable cancers.
The Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences
is awarded in equal shares to
Emmanuel Candès
The Barnum–Simons Chair in Mathematics and Statistics, Stanford University, USA and
Camillo De Lellis
IBM von Neumann Professor, School of Mathematics, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, USA
for their breakthrough contributions to the use of deep techniques from mathematical analysis to rigorously understand applied problems in information theory, signal processing and statistics on the one hand, and to the study of singularities in geometric measure theory and fluid dynamics on the other.
Wednesday, 27 May 2026.
At today's press conference in Hong Kong, The Shaw Prize Foundation announced the Shaw Laureates for 2026. Information was posted on the website
www.shawprize.org
at Hong Kong time 15:30 (GMT 07:30).
The Shaw Prize consists of four annual prizes — Astronomy, Life Science and Medicine, and Mathematical Sciences, awarded since 2004, together with the newly introduced Computer Science Prize, to be awarded from 2027. Each bearing a monetary award of US$1.2 million. This will be the twenty-third year that the Prize has been awarded and the date of presentation ceremony will be announced in due
course.
SOURCE Shaw Prize
21
%
more press release views with
Request a Demo
×
Modal title
Also from this source
Bekanntgabe der Shaw-Preisträger 2026
Der Shaw-Preis in Astronomie wird zu gleichen Teilen verliehen an Ken'ichi Nomoto Emeritierter Professor und leitender Gastwissenschaftler des...
Annonce des lauréats de l'édition 2026 du prix Shaw
Le prix Shaw d'astronomie est décerné à parts égales à Ken'ichi Nomoto Professeur émérite et chercheur principal invité de l'Institut Kavli pour la...
More Releases From This Source
Explore
Biotechnology
Health Care & Hospitals
News Releases in Similar Topics