Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                                        № 5/2025
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                             Tr isections of
                       four-dimensional spaces


                                    Sarah Blackwell 1




       This snapshot introduces the theory of trisections of
       smooth 4-manifolds, an area of exploration in low-
       dimensional topology aiming to make four-dimensional
       spaces more understandable. Along the way, we dis-
       cuss the concepts of topology, dimension, manifolds,
       and more!

1 T h e myster ious four th dimension

Four-dimensional spaces are notoriously hard to study. One might think that
the higher the dimension, the harder it is to study, but strangely enough, this is
not the case. 2 Above dimension 4, loosely speaking, there is enough “room” to
study these spaces by moving around lower-dimensional spaces within them. 3
Dimensions 1, 2, and 3 have the benefit of being easy to visualize, and much
work has been done classically in these dimensions. However, dimension 4
remains mysterious, acting as a sort of “phase change” between lower and higher
dimensions: it is both too big and not big enough.

 1 The author would like to thank the Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in Bonn for

its financial support and hospitality, Arunima Ray for her mentorship and careful reading of
an initial draft, and the snapshot editors for their suggestions. She is supported by an NSF
Postdoctoral Fellowship under the grant DMS-2303143.
 2 From certain perspectives. The author discloses that she does not personally study

dimensions higher than four and is thus highly biased.
 3 This is a vague reference to a theorem called the h-cobordism theorem.




                                             1
Figu r e 1 : A coffee mug morphing continuously into a doughnut. A very nice
              animation of this can be found at the top of the Wikipedia page for
              homeomorphism [30].


   The study of the fourth dimension is of inherent interest to pure mathemati-
cians, but there are applications of this study outside of theoretical mathematics
as well. For instance, physicists use four-dimensional space to model space-time,
with three dimensions representing “space” and one dimension representing
“time”. So, research that helps demystify the fourth dimension is of broad
interest to the scientific community.


2 Setting the stage

One subfield of pure mathematics that is especially invested in the study of the
fourth dimension is low-dimensional topology, where dimensions 4 and less count
as “low”. Topology is the study of continuous deformations of geometric objects;
a long-running joke says that topologists cannot tell the difference between a
doughnut and a coffee mug, because (if they were made out of playdough) one
could be molded continuously (without breaking or gluing) into the other, as
in Figure 1.

2.1 T h e m a i n c h a ra c t e r s : m a n i f o l d s

The main characters in the field of low-dimensional topology, that is, the objects
primarily being studied, are called “manifolds”. Of all of the kinds of geometric
objects that might exist, manifolds are particularly nice, as they have certain
properties that make them appealing and accessible for research. They are also
natural in some sense, showing up in other disciplines, such as physics, and
“real world” situations, as we will see shortly.
    Readers may recall the term Euclidean space from a high school or college
mathematics course. One-dimensional Euclidean space is a line extending
infinitely in both directions. If one chooses an origin, one can associate a real
number to each point on the line. That is why one-dimensional Euclidean space
is also called the real number line. Two-dimensional Euclidean space may be
particularly familiar; this is the plane on which equations are graphed using
Cartesian coordinates. In other words, the plane is obtained by taking two real


                                                      2
Figure 2 : From left to right: models for one-, two-, and three-dimensional
            Euclidean space. Each is built from the previous one by adding a
            new axis.


number lines and intersecting them at their origin. The position of each point
in the plane is then determined by two real numbers, read from the two axes.
Three-dimensional Euclidean space takes the Cartesian plane and adds a third
axis; see Figure 2. Beyond three dimensions, we lose the ability to visualize this
space, but the definition can be extended similarly. Four-dimensional Euclidean
space is thus spanned by four axes, and one needs four real numbers to locate a
point in four-dimensional space.
    Euclidean space is, in some sense, extremely manageable. For instance, this
is the setting in which we learn calculus. Manifolds are, in some sense, the next
best thing; these are objects which locally look like Euclidean space, even though
they might globally look like something else. This means that around each point
on a manifold, there is a small region that can be continuously deformed (like
the coffee mug in Figure 1) so that it looks like a region in Euclidean space.
For example, the surface of the Earth is a two-dimensional 4 manifold called a
sphere. The reason is that locally, the Earth looks like a flat plane; when we
stand on the Earth’s surface and look in all directions, it looks flat to us, and
indeed humanity thought the Earth was flat for a large part of our existence.
However, we now know that the Earth is indeed curved, and if we were to view
the Earth from outer space, we could see this curvature; see Figure 3.
    Two important types of manifolds, which often serve as building blocks for
constructing more complicated manifolds, are genus g surfaces and handlebodies.
Surfaces are two-dimensional manifolds described as follows. The genus 0 surface
is the sphere, and the genus 1 surface is the torus, which resembles an inner tube.

 4 Some readers may object to “two-dimensional”, as opposed to “three-dimensional”. This

is because outside of research mathematics, it is a common practice to refer to spheres (and
certain other shapes) as three-dimensional because they are being thought of as sitting inside
three-dimensional space. However, inherently the sphere is a two-dimensional object because
it locally looks like a plane, which is two-dimensional Euclidean space. It should also be noted
that while the surface of the Earth is a two-dimensional space, the Earth itself (including all
the stuff below the surface) is three-dimensional.


                                               3
Figu r e 3 : An observer (not to scale) standing on the surface of the Earth,
              which is a sphere. A small region around the observer is a disk, and
              although in reality it is curved like a contact lens, it can be flattened
              out continuously to look like a region in two-dimensional Euclidean
              space.


For g > 0, genus g surfaces are obtained by sticking g copies of the torus together;
see Figure 4 (top row). The non-negative integer g then counts the number of
“holes” in the surface. A handlebody is a three-dimensional manifold obtained
by “filling in” a two-dimensional genus g surface; see Figure 4 (bottom row).


2.2 Two f l avo r s : s m o o t h ve r s u s t o p o l o g i c a l

There are some other technicalities involved in the precise definition of a
manifold, but for this article, it is mostly enough to think of manifolds as objects
that locally look like Euclidean space. However, when thinking about four-
dimensional manifolds, or 4-manifolds, there is one other technical consideration
to take into account. There are different flavors of manifolds, and two of the most
important types to consider in this dimension are called smooth and topological.
In dimensions 1, 2, and 3, there is no difference between a smooth and a
topological manifold, 5 but in dimension 4, there can be quite a large difference,
and in fact, this is one of the reasons why dimension 4 is so mysterious!
   The distinction between the two – in a very broad sense – is that we can do
calculus on smooth manifolds, but not on topological manifolds. All smooth
manifolds are also topological manifolds, but not all topological manifolds are
smooth manifolds; topological manifolds allow “corners” which mess up our
ability to do calculus. Readers might remember a classic example from their
calculus class: the absolute value function y = |x| is not differentiable at the
corner (0, 0). Therefore, the graph of this function is not a smooth 1-manifold,
but it is still a topological manifold, as the corner can be continuously deformed
so that it looks like one-dimensional Euclidean space again.

5 More explicitly, in these dimensions, two manifolds cannot be topologically the same but

smoothly different. However, this phenomenon can happen in dimension 4!


                                                     4
Figure 4 : Genus g surfaces (top row) and handlebodies (bottom row). The
               surfaces in the top row do not have “stuff” inside them; for instance,
               think of the second picture as an inner tube. The handlebodies in
               the bottom row are obtained by “filling in” the surfaces; for instance,
               think of the second picture as a solid doughnut. Left to right, the
               genera of the surfaces shown are 0, 1, 2, and 3.


   Both topological and smooth manifolds are of interest to low-dimensional
topologists, but in this article we focus on smooth manifolds, as this is the
setting in which we can enact our chosen methodology for studying the fourth
dimension: trisections! 6 7


2.3 Th e m e t h o d o l o g y : t r i s e c t i o n s

Often the techniques used in the study of four-dimensional spaces are inspired
by techniques that have worked in three dimensions. In the study of three-
dimensional manifolds, or 3-manifolds, it is often useful to consider decomposi-
tions called Heegaard splittings. Every 3-manifold admits a splitting into two
“nice” pieces, and this decomposition allows the 3-manifold to be described by
diagrams consisting of curves on a surface. A trisection is the four-dimensional
analogue of this idea; a trisection decomposes a 4-manifold into three “nice”
pieces, with the complexity of the manifold relegated to the way these pieces
are glued together, and allows a similar diagram.
   The theory of trisections, first introduced in 2012 by Gay and Kirby [12],
is a relatively new field which has inspired a great amount of work in the

 6 Additionally, what is widely considered to be the most important open problem in the

field of low-dimensional topology deals with smooth 4-manifolds. Grigori Perelman famously
solved the Poincaré conjecture – and subsequently declined a Fields Medal and Millennium
Prize for this breakthrough – which was a conjecture about 3-manifolds. The conjecture
had previously been posed and partially answered for other dimensions and categories of
manifolds, but it is still not known whether it is true for smooth 4-manifolds.
 7 For further reading on the distinction between smooth and topological, see for instance

the general audience articles [13, 14] from Quanta Magazine.


                                                         5
years since its introduction. These decompositions are useful in the study of
4-manifolds as they provide a way to turn smooth information (the 4-manifold)
into combinatorial data (the diagram). An especially intriguing aspect of
trisections is their apparent ability to encode geometric information efficiently,
as evidenced by much recent work developing the connections between trisections
and other subfields of pure mathematics such as complex geometry and symplectic
geometry [10, 3, 9, 19, 20, 16, 18, 4].


3 Getting into the details

Originally [12], trisections were defined for smooth 4-manifolds which also
satisfied the following properties: “closed”, “connected”, and “orientable”. Sub-
sequently, the definition has been extended to include 4-manifolds that do not
have some of these properties [6, 7, 8, 27], as well as various other settings such
as dimensions other than 4. We will expand briefly on this later.

3.1 T h e d e f i n i t i o n

For now, we focus on the original setting – smooth 4-manifolds which are
also “closed”, “connected”, and “orientable”. Roughly speaking, closed means
that the manifold has no boundary and can be contained inside of a ball
(that is, it does not extend forever), 8 connected means that it consists of only
one piece, and orientable 9 means that it has an “inside” and an “outside”. 10
However, requiring these properties is not very restrictive; there are many closed,
connected, orientable, smooth 4-manifolds.
   As described previously, a trisection is a decomposition of a 4-manifold into
three “nice” pieces. This is often represented with the schematic in Figure 5. The
disk altogether represents the 4-manifold which we call X, 11 and the sectors
represent the three pieces, which are also four-dimensional and which we call X1 ,
X2 , and X3 . These pieces are required to be four-dimensional handlebodies. 12

8 For example, the disk is not closed while the sphere is closed, because an observer walking

on the surface of the Earth will never reach a boundary (as would be the case with walking
on a disk). The Earth itself as a 3-manifold is not closed: it is bounded by the sphere.
9 Two well-known surfaces which are non-orientable are the Möbius strip, which has a

boundary, and the Klein bottle, which does not have a boundary.
10 All the surfaces shown in Figure 4 are closed, connected and orientable, while the handle-

bodies are connected and orientable, but not closed, as they have boundaries.
11 This schematic is a bit misleading, because the manifold we are considering does not have

a boundary, while the disk does have a boundary. A better schematic would be a trisected
sphere, but this is harder to draw and digest.
12 Technically speaking, these are called four-dimensional one-handlebodies, as there are

different types of handlebodies in this dimension. But we will not discuss this in more depth,
so we remove the “one” for convenience.

                                              6
Figure 5 : A schematic representing a 4-manifold X which has been split into
           three pieces X1 , X2 , and X3 .


We will not define them here, but one can think of them as four-dimensional
analogues of the three-dimensional handlebodies. The three spokes in the disk,
colored red, blue, and green, represent the intersections of the four-dimensional
pieces: X1 ∩ X2 (red), X2 ∩ X3 (blue), and X3 ∩ X1 (green). These intersections
are three-dimensional pieces which are required to be handlebodies. The point
in the center of the disk where the spokes meet is the triple intersection of the
four-dimensional pieces: X1 ∩ X2 ∩ X3 . This must be a genus g surface, which
is referred to as the central surface. The non-negative integer g is called the
trisection genus.



3.2 So m e mu s i n g s

This decomposition of a 4-manifold into four-dimensional handlebodies is par-
ticularly nice for two reasons: (1) it is well-understood what “four-dimensional
handlebodies” look like (although we will not go into detail about this here),
and (2) due to a result by Laudenbach and Poénaru [22], the two- and three-
dimensional pieces determine the four-dimensional pieces. 13
   When Gay and Kirby defined trisections, they proved that every 4-manifold
(with the extra properties noted above) admits such a decomposition, and
furthermore, this decomposition is unique up to a “stabilization” operation. This
means that although a given 4-manifold does not admit one unique trisection
on the nose, the different trisections it admits can all be related by stabilization.
We will not define it here, but this operation increases the trisection genus
in a natural way, and mirrors a similar operation in the setting of Heegaard
splittings.

13 A common way of saying this is that given the two- and three-dimensional stuff, the

four-dimensional handlebodies can be “glued in” uniquely.


                                          7
Figu r e 6 : Some examples of genus 0, 1, and 2 trisection diagrams. The sphere
            without curves is a very special case; in general, a genus g surface
            will require g red, blue, and green curves each in a diagram.



3.3 D i a gra m s


The fact that trisections are completely determined by their two- and three-
dimensional parts allows us to represent a trisected 4-manifold by a diagram
consisting of curves on the central surface. This is particularly useful, as the
fourth dimension is naturally very difficult to visualize, and these diagrams
allow us to see how the 4-manifold is built in dimensions that we understand.
Some examples of trisection diagrams are given in Figure 6.
   Roughly speaking, the curves on the central surface show how to “glue in”
the three-dimensional handlebodies; 14 in this way, the colors of the curves in
Figure 6 (red, blue, and green) correspond to the colors of the handlebodies
in Figure 5 (red, blue, and green). Once we know how the handlebodies
are attached to the central surface, we have determined the entire trisected
4-manifold, by Laudenbach and Poénaru [22].
    Given a value g of the trisection genus, not every 4-manifold is guaranteed to
admit a trisection of this genus, although it is guaranteed that the 4-manifold
admits a trisection of some genus. The stabilization operation increases the
genus by one, which means that while the genus can always be increased, for
each 4-manifold there is a minimal genus for which the 4-manifold admits a
trisection of that genus. The diagrams shown in Figure 6 are the only genus 0, 1,
and 2 trisection diagrams. 15 16 This is not very difficult to prove for the genus 0
and 1 cases, but solving the genus 2 case required a considerable amount of
effort [25]. Such a classification for genus 3 and higher is unknown, although due
to work of Meier [23], in stark contrast with the situation for genus 2 and lower,
it is known that infinitely many smooth 4-manifolds admit genus 3 trisections!

14 We will not explain how that works here, but it is interesting that the three-dimensional

handlebodies can be determined with just one-dimensional curves!
15 This is up to certain moves on the diagrams which preserve the trisection of the 4-manifold.
16 By an operation called “connected sum”, one can build higher genus diagrams from

multiple smaller genus diagrams. Technically, the diagrams in Figure 6 are the only irreducible
diagrams, meaning they are not the connected sum of smaller genus diagrams.


                                              8
4 O d ds and ends

4.1 Wh a t o t h e r k i n d s o f t h i n g s c a n b e t r i s e c t e d ?

The notion of trisections has been extended to many other settings; we will briefly
mention a few here. The study of so-called “knotted surfaces” in 4-manifolds is
akin to the study of knots in three-dimensional spaces. A knotted surface sitting
inside of a 4-manifold can always be put into a position such that it inherits a
trisection of its own [24, 26, 15]. Another extension is the algebraic setting of
“group trisections”, in which an algebraic object called a “fundamental group”,
corresponding to a 4-manifold or knotted surface, is trisected [1, 5]. Finally,
extensions to various higher-dimensional settings have also been considered
[21, 28, 2].

4.2 Wh a t i s s o s p e c i a l a b o u t t h e nu m b e r t h r e e ?

In short, nothing. Islambouli and Naylor generalized the notion of trisections
to “multisections” [17], in which the number of pieces the manifold is split into
increases. One benefit of using more pieces is that generally, as the number
of pieces increases, the multisection genus decreases, which might be desirable
depending on the context. However, going smaller than three – trying to “bisect”
a 4-manifold – is where one runs into problems. Generally, at least three pieces
are required in order for this decomposition to work, although the notion of a
“bisection” has been explored in various special settings [17, 18].

4.3 So yo u wa n t t o b e a t o p o l o g i s t ?

For those interested in further reading, there are many great places to look. For
an excellent introduction to the world of topology with a low barrier to entry,
check out “The Shape of Space” by Weeks [31]. An advanced undergraduate
student or graduate student interested in the fourth dimension may wish to check
out “The Wild World of 4-Manifolds” by Scorpan [29]. Finally, for the graduate
student or mathematics researcher looking for an introduction to trisections,
the paper “From Heegaard splittings to trisections; porting 3-dimensional ideas
to dimension 4” by Gay may be of interest [11].


R e f e rences

 [1] A. Aaron, D. Gay, and R. Kirby, Group trisections and smooth 4-manifolds,
     Geometry & Topology 22 (2018), no. 3, 1537–1545.
 [2] F. B. Aribi, S. Courte, M. Golla, and D. Moussard, Multisections of higher-
     dimensional manifolds, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2303.08779 (2023).


                                                       9
 [3] R. İnanç Baykur and O. Saeki, Simplified broken Lefschetz fibrations and
     trisections of 4-manifolds, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
     115 (2018), no. 43, 10894–10900.

 [4] S. Blackwell, D. Gay, and P. Lambert-Cole, Constructing Lagrangians from
     triple grid diagrams, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2306.16404 (2023).

 [5] S. Blackwell, R. Kirby, M. Klug, V. Longo, and B. Ruppik, A group-theoretic
     framework for low-dimensional topology, arXiv preprint, arXiv:2301.05685
     (2023).

 [6] N. Castro, Relative trisections of smooth 4-manifolds with boundary, PhD
     thesis, University of Georgia, 2016.

 [7] N. Castro, D. Gay, and J. Pinzón-Caicedo, Diagrams for relative trisections,
     Pacific Journal of Mathematics 294 (2018), no. 2, 275–305.

 [8]         , Trisections of 4-manifolds with boundary, Proceedings of the
       National Academy of Sciences 115 (2018), no. 43, 10861–10868.

 [9] N. Castro and B. Ozbagci, Trisections of 4-manifolds via Lefschetz fibra-
     tions, Mathematical Research Letters 26 (2019), no. 2, 383–420.

[10] D. Gay, Trisections of Lefschetz pencils, Algebraic & Geometric Topology
     16 (2016), no. 6, 3523–3531.

[11]           , From Heegaard splittings to trisections; porting 3-dimensional
       ideas to dimension 4, Winter Braids Lecture Notes 5 (2018), 1–19.

[12] D. Gay and R. Kirby, Trisecting 4-manifolds, Geometry & Topology 20
     (2016), no. 6, 3097–3132.

[13] K. Hartnett, New Math Book Rescues Landmark Topology Proof,
     Quanta      Magazine   (2021),   https://www.quantamagazine.org/
     new-math-book-rescues-landmark-topology-proof-20210909/, visited on
     April 4, 2024.

[14]           , Surfaces So Different Even a Fourth Dimension Can’t Make Them
       the Same, Quanta Magazine (2022), https://www.quantamagazine.org/
       special-surfaces-remain-distinct-in-four-dimensions-20220616/, visited on
       April 4, 2024.

[15] M. C. Hughes, S. Kim, and M. Miller, Isotopies of surfaces in 4-manifolds
     via banded unlink diagrams, Geometry & Topology 24 (2020), no. 3, 1519–
     1569.


                                       10
[16] G. Islambouli, H. Karimi, P. Lambert-Cole, and J. Meier, Toric multi-
     sections and curves in rational surfaces, Indiana University Mathematics
     Journal 73 (2024), no. 4, 1269–1306.
[17] G. Islambouli and P. Naylor, Multisections of 4-manifolds, Transactions of
     the American Mathematical Society 377 (2024), no. 2, 1033–1068.
[18] G. Islambouli and L. Starkston, Multisections with divides and Weinstein
     4-manifolds, The Journal of Symplectic Geometry 22 (2024), no. 2, 223–266.
[19] P. Lambert-Cole and J. Meier, Bridge trisections in rational surfaces,
     Journal of Topology and Analysis (2020), 1–54.
[20] P. Lambert-Cole, J. Meier, and L. Starkston, Symplectic 4-manifolds admit
     Weinstein trisections, Journal of Topology 14 (2021), no. 2, 641–673.
[21] P. Lambert-Cole and M. Miller, Trisections of 5-manifolds, 2019-20 MA-
     TRIX Annals (2021), 117–134.
[22] F. Laudenbach and V. Poénaru, A note on 4-dimensional handlebodies,
     Bulletin de la Société Mathématique de France 100 (1972), 337–344.
[23] J. Meier, Trisections and spun 4-manifolds, Mathematical Research Letters
     25 (2018), no. 5, 1497–1524.
[24] J. Meier and A. Zupan, Bridge trisections of knotted surfaces in S 4 , Transac-
     tions of the American Mathematical Society 369 (2017), no. 10, 7343–7386.
[25]           , Genus-two trisections are standard, Geometry & Topology 21
       (2017), no. 3, 1583–1630.
[26]          , Bridge trisections of knotted surfaces in 4-manifolds, Proceedings
       of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (2018), no. 43, 10880–10886.
[27] M. Miller and P. Naylor, Trisections of Nonorientable 4-Manifolds, Michigan
     Mathematical Journal (2023), 1–45.
[28] J. H. Rubinstein and S. Tillmann, Generalized trisections in all dimensions,
     Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115 (2018), no. 43,
     10908–10913.
[29] A. Scorpan, The Wild World of 4-Manifolds, American Mathematical
     Society, 2022.
[30] L. Vieira, Mug and torus morph.gif, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:
     Mug_and_Torus_morph.gif, visited on April 4, 2024.
[31] J. R. Weeks, The Shape of Space, CRC Press, 2001.



                                        11
Sarah B l a ck we l l i s a n NSF Postdoctoral   License
Fellow a t t h e U n i ve r s ity of Virginia.   Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0

Mathe m a t i c a l s u b j e c ts               DOI
Geom e t r y a n d To p o l ogy                  10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 5 - 0 0 5 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r                              Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Elisa b e t h a u s d e m S i epen               Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de               Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                 77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                              Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e                Director
                                                 Gerhard H u i s ke n
