AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society

AMS Website Down

Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm. 

PDFLINK

History

A Very Brief Political History of American-hosted International Congresses of Mathematicians
Michael J. Barany
Communicated by 
Notices
 Associate Editor Adrian C. Rice

1
.

Introduction

International Congresses of Mathematicians (ICMs) have been, from the start, occasions for excitement and optimism about mathematics and about ties among mathematicians. Mathematics has long been a subject around which people have built interpersonal relationships and border-crossing connections, and those relationships and connections have in turn contributed profoundly to mathematics. ICMs have also been critical proving grounds for the political conditions and commitments that have enabled and constrained the discipline’s people, partnerships, and projects.

Mathematicians cooperate and compete within disciplinary communities while also being a part of the wider political world. Notwithstanding an ideal that sometimes separates the personal and intellectual realms from that wider world, the conflicts and diplomacy of mathematicians’ national and institutional settings have been perennially relevant to their discipline.

This short article sketches some of the political history of past ICMs that American mathematicians have hosted or intended to host in the United States. I aim to place the upcoming Philadelphia ICM in a historical context that will help readers to recognize and ask questions about the political conditions and consequences of such events.

It is traditional to celebrate the borderlessness of mathematical research at ICMs, but the history of their organization tends to point rather to the persistent relevance of borders and of geopolitical conflict for mathematics as it has come to be done in its international and global eras. Some aspects from American congresses past, such as the conditions under which the United States bid to host the ICM, the role of private philanthropy in the Congress’s organization, and tension over travel and visas, may appear familiar to those looking ahead to the 2026 congress.

2
.

A Columbian Precursor

When Zürich’s mathematicians invited their international counterparts to the first International Congress of Mathematicians in 1897, they saw themselves as the natural initiators of an overdue gathering. It was an age of international gatherings, scientific and otherwise. The modern Olympic Games had launched to great fanfare the previous year in Athens. Congresses and expositions had become, in the decades leading up to the turn of the century, distinguished sites for performing and celebrating the competition and cooperation among nations that drove and connected the modern world.

Together with London and Paris, a rotating cast of major cities of the United States played host to many of the most ambitious realizations of the movement for international gatherings, in the form of “world” or “universal” fairs and expositions. Exuberantly commercial affairs, these made public spectacles of the science and technology that proved the vitality of participating nations. They ran on glitz and hype, inviting visitors to step into a future of marvels and possibilities.

Within the six months of the 1893 Chicago World’s Columbian Exposition, a World’s Fair best known for debuting the Ferris Wheel, the organizers devoted a week at the end of August to feature Science and Philosophy among the Fair’s grand visions. Chicago’s mathematicians took the opportunity to invite, as they later reported, “a large number of eminent specialists … in American and European countries” to visit for a Congress. The German government deputed Göttingen mathematician Felix Klein, who attended with a bundle of mathematical papers offered by his countrymen. Four visitors with European addresses (2 from Germany, 1 from Austria, and 1 from Italy) joined a larger American cohort to present the titles and abstracts of papers from European and American authors, to listen to mathematical lectures, and, in closing, to praise German universities and mathematicians.

When the International Congresses of Mathematicians began in Zürich four years later, there is no indication that the Chicago gathering was considered to have been a precursor, nor does such an association appear to have been entertained for decades thereafter. In 1895, the American Mathematical Society endorsed a French proposal, initiated at an 1894 meeting of the German Mathematical Society, to support the organization of an International Congress. The resulting series of congresses had consistent American participation but were otherwise predominantly European gatherings. Attendance in the pre-World War I meetings was overwhelmingly made up of mathematicians from Switzerland and the neighboring countries (plus Britain) that would host the initial run of Congresses.

Yet today, the 1893 Chicago event features on the International Mathematical Union’s webpage of ICM proceedings, noted as a “precursor” or “zeroeth” ICM to the first in Zürich. This is a legacy of the American hosts of the 1950 ICM. By claiming the Columbian congress as a forerunner to their own, the 1950 hosts asserted that Americans were important to organized international mathematics from the start, offering a line of continuity to a perceived golden age of mathematical internationalism from before the upheaval of two world wars.

3
.

Two Failed Attempts

The disruption of the First World War gave American mathematicians their first opening to attempt to forge a link in the chain begun in Zürich. Following the Treaty of Versailles, the mantle of these ICMs passed controversially in 1920 to Strasbourg, a city once again in France after a half century of German rule. Mathematicians from Germany and its wartime allies were not invited, and many others stayed away. The small American delegation offered an apparently impromptu bid for the 1924 Congress, with no formal advance backing from their colleagues back home. They hoped that taking the next Congress out of conflict-scarred Europe would, with the benefit of the intervening four years of cooling off and rebuilding, allow the mathematicians of Europe and beyond to come together as they had before the war.

They were sorely mistaken in that hope, and the troubling reality of international conflict confronted them with escalating urgency as the projected date of their congress approached. The question of excluding or permitting mathematicians from the former Central Powers, which the would-be hosts had expected to be a fleeting obsession confined to Strasbourg, remained a particularly difficult sticking point for prospective participants and sponsors. Struggling to secure financial backing, those in charge of the 1924 American effort were relieved when Canadian mathematician John Charles Fields offered to take on their obligation and move the congress to Toronto. Fields at least succeeded financially, benefiting from vigorous advance fundraising and the lower hosting costs that came with the meeting’s low attendance. The surplus from the Congress and 
Proceedings
 subscriptions, supplemented by Fields’s estate after his death in 1932, provided the impetus and money for a new medal to be awarded at future ICMs. In his plan for the medal, Fields included a number of stipulations intended to avoid international rivalry, including that the medal not be named for any person or place.

Seizing the occasion at another geopolitically fraught ICM, a larger American delegation came to Oslo in 1936 with an official bid to host the subsequent congress. Financial and political crises in Europe significantly depressed participation at the Oslo congress, and those assembled once again put their hopes in the prospect of an American answer to the woes of a fractured Europe. Both of the inaugural Fields medalists that year had American connections: an older American, Jesse Douglas, then employed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (before the intensive wartime research program that made it into the scientific powerhouse we know today), and a younger Finn, Lars Ahlfors, who had recently taken a short-term position at Harvard and would return there after the Second World War. Those two neighboring institutions, Harvard and MIT, were to host the 1940 event.

Despite the worsening situation in Europe, financial and scientific planning for the Congress initially went much better for the would-be hosts than with their previous attempt. Major American philanthropies including the Rockefeller Foundation had taken an interest in international mathematics in the intervening period, and pledged considerable backing for this chance to assert American leadership in the field. Committees of the congress had begun to send invitations to plenary speakers, and these indicators of esteem would later prove valuable when some of these same mathematicians attempted to enter the United States as war refugees. The planning could not outrun world events, and the September 1939 German invasion of Poland prompted the American Mathematical Society to suspend the 1940 Congress indefinitely.

4
.

The 1950 Harvard Congress

Mere months after the atomic bomb detonations and close of the Pacific war in 1945, leaders of the American Mathematical Society began exploring the possibilities for resuming the suspended congress. Recalling the main lessons from the previous world war, the hosts were most concerned with the problem of whom they should invite or exclude, and by what means. Surveying their European contacts about this problem, they began to appreciate the greater logistical and financial challenges of enabling the participation of mathematicians from the devastated continent. In surviving records of their discussions, they showed little awareness or concern for comparable difficulties from other parts of the world.

The organizers’ interwar fundraising success proved decisive for the Congress’s postwar timing. At first, the AMS committee members responsible for handling the suspended Congress floated a range of dates to their foreign and domestic contacts. When the Rockefeller Foundation informed the AMS in October 1946 that their pledge for the 1940 Congress would lapse and require a fresh application if extended beyond 1950, the committee rapidly settled on 1950 as their target date. This was approved by the AMS Council early in 1947.

Mathematicians involved in more recent ICMs may wonder why the timing (and, indeed, location) was a decision for the AMS Council rather than the International Mathematical Union. The reason was that the International Mathematical Union that had been established at the 1920 Strasbourg Congress had effectively collapsed in the 1930s. Mathematicians in the United States and Europe saw the resumption of ICMs as a chance to relaunch the International Mathematical Union (IMU) as well, while being wary of the conflicts surrounding the 1920 union. Disagreements over where and how and by whom the new union should be promulgated led the Harvard ICM organizers to insist on a separation between the ICM and IMU projects. Thus, the main organizing meeting for the new IMU took place in New York before the Harvard ICM, and the process of establishing today’s IMU was not completed until 1951, with the first General Assembly following in 1952.

Having arrived in a permanent capacity at Harvard in 1946, Lars Ahlfors had a front row seat to the many interlocking local, national, and international negotiations behind the congress. Many of the organizers and committee members had current or past connection to Harvard’s mathematics department, and Harvard’s own mathematicians found themselves in great demand. On receiving yet another committee welcome letter at the end of 1948, Ahlfors responded initially that he assumed it was sent to him in error, as he was already on three different scientific committees (including for the Fields Medal), in addition to being involved in local arrangements. This flurry of activity allowed for efficiencies and also some crossed correspondence; an apparent filing mistake allowed Ahlfors’s Fields Medal files to be blended with records of travel grants, press releases, orchestra bookings, and the many other aspects of the ICM managed at least in part through Harvard’s mathematics department. Those files give the most comprehensive surviving picture of the perception and awarding of the early Fields Medals.

The hosts counted some 2,300 participants, the vast majority from the United States. Picture a smaller and more formal version of the Joint Mathematics Meetings now hosted annually by the AMS and partners. It was, at the time, by a considerable margin the largest-ever gathering of mathematicians. The non-USA attendance strongly reflected American geopolitical priorities of the 1930s and 1940s, with notable participation from Latin America and from countries with greater connections to the American war effort.

For the organizers and participants, the most conspicuous absences from the 1950 ICM were mathematicians from the Soviet Bloc. The Soviet Union and United States were military allies at the end of the war, and in early planning the AMS assumed that Soviet participation might be logistically but not politically difficult. Official American government and diplomatic anticommunism escalated rapidly from 1947. Soviet restrictions on Western travel meant that Soviet mathematicians’ hopes of participating stopped before they could become a diplomatic challenge for the ICM hosts. Mathematicians from non-Soviet countries with Communist political histories accounted for the bulk of diplomatic stress, requiring special lobbying in Washington, DC. The hosts narrowly avoided a threatened boycott over American border controls, led by French mathematicians and endorsed by the lead American IMU organizer, Marshall Stone.

In the end, the Congress’s organizers were content to declare the meeting “truly international” on the grounds that nobody was formally barred from attending on the basis of their nationality.

5
.

The 1986 Berkeley Congress

By then a very gray eminence, Ahlfors starred in a more symbolic role as honorary president of the next American-hosted ICM, at Berkeley in 1986.

As they had in 1920 and 1936, the American hopefuls lodged their bid at a European meeting mired in crisis: in this instance, the Warsaw ICM that had been delayed to 1983 following a declaration of martial law in Poland and the imprisonment of a number of the host mathematicians. Though the surrounding events now appear in retrospect as a turning point in the Cold War, at the time many mathematicians considered attendance to amount to an endorsement of the government that had been brutally suppressing the Solidarity movement and had even suspended the Polish Mathematical Society.

For the first time, the United States would host an ICM formally under the auspices of the IMU. This meant that the Congress was officially hosted not by the American Mathematical Society, but by the United States’ adhering body to the IMU, the National Academy of Sciences and its National Committee for Mathematics, chaired by Mary Ellen Rudin. Women also helmed the two bodies that took on the primary practical responsibilities: Jill Mesirov directed the nonprofit corporation, ICM-86, established to facilitate the Congress’s operations, and H. Hope Daly ran the Meetings Department of the AMS.

Linda Keen, President of the Association for Women in Mathematics, noted with disappointment that the all-male Program Committee initially invited just one woman speaker, historian Judith Grabiner. An AWM letter-writing campaign led to a few more invitations to women, but all of the most prestigious plenary slots and the Fields Medals went to men. Berkeley mathematician Marina Ratner boycotted the Congress for its “de facto ‘female free’ policy.” At the ICM, 400 participants packed an AWM-organized panel on women in international mathematics, where they adopted a resolution calling for better representation of the world’s “mathematical and geographic breadth as well as both sexes” at future congresses.

Cold War politics and anxieties loomed large. The 
Proceedings
 printed a welcome letter signed by US President Ronald Reagan praising the “intrinsically international” character of mathematics and wishing “God bless you” to the participants. Earlier that same year, Reagan’s administration launched what became an annual Mathematics Awareness Week (later, Month) to attempt to reinvigorate American students’ interest in mathematical careers, which had declined after its Sputnik-era surge. This decline was an active subject of conversation and media interest in the congress. Meanwhile, letters to the 
Notices
 that year pulsed with controversy over the role of American military funding in mathematics, while the highest “Grand Benefactor” category of ICM sponsors included, separately, the US Air Force, Army, and Navy.

The official report of the meeting in the October 1986 
Notices
 opined that “The only seriously disturbing feature of the Congress was the absence of many Soviet mathematicians,” including the invited (and accepted) Soviet plenary speaker. Cuban mathematicians were denied entry to the United States, undermining the IMU President’s claim at the closing ceremony that the host country had granted all visas sought. On the other hand, Berkeley’s was the first ICM with official participation from the People’s Republic of China, following a long-running dispute with the IMU over its recognition of Taiwan.

Ultimately, about two-thirds of the roughly 3,500 participants were based in the host country, whose universities by then employed mathematicians in large numbers from many parts of the globe. Your earlier mental image of a smaller Joint Mathematics Meeting is still mostly accurate if you add a Thursday afternoon barbecue and rodeo.

The August issue of the 
Notices
 printed a June letter jointly signed by ICM-86 President Andrew Gleason and AMS President Irving Kaplansky, which urged their countrymen to attend the “truly international” gathering in Berkeley. They warned that “If a similar gap recurs” to the gap between 1986 and the previous American-hosted meeting in 1950, then “it will be 2022 before the same opportunity occurs again.” This must have felt very far in the future.

6
.

Further Reading

The International Mathematical Union hosts digitized proceedings of each past International Congress, as well as the 1893 Chicago events, at 
https://www.mathunion.org/icm/proceedings
.

The IMU also maintains a collection of open access materials on the history of the union and congresses at 
https://www.mathunion.org/organization/imu-history
. These include books by Olli Lehto (MR1488698), Guillermo Curbera (MR2499757), and Norbert Schappacher (MR4461006), as well as the short 
Illustrated History
 of the international congresses published just after the 1986 congress by Donald Albers, Gerald Alexanderson, and Constance Reid (MR0874336).

The Association for Women in Mathematics has digitized the back issues of its Newsletter at 
https://awm-math.org/publications/newsletter/
, including extensive discussions of gender disparities at ICMs, notably Berkeley’s.

My discussion of American mathematicians’ internationalism between 1920 and 1950 is based on research reported in the history of science journal 
Isis
, at DOI 
10.1086/727706
 (MR4692787), and in an expanded French version translated by Pierre Verschueren in the excellent edited volume 
Le Monde des mathématiques
 (Seuil, 2023). I discuss the 1950 Fields Medal files in 
Nature
, at DOI 
10.1038/d41586-018-00513-8
 (MR4528720). My 
Notices
 article on the origins of “mathematics awareness” is at DOI 
10.1090/noti1506
 (MR3617313).

AMS 2018 Whiteman Prize winner Karen Parshall has written extensively on the national and international involvements of American mathematicians; see especially her recent book 
The New Era in American Mathematics 1920–1950
 (Princeton, 2022) (MR4446465).

Michael J. Barany is a senior lecturer in the history of science at the University of Edinburgh. His email address is 
[email protected]
.

Article DOI: 
10.1090/noti3314
Credits

Author photo is courtesy of The Royal Society of Edinburgh/Ian Georgeson photography.