In a 
recent post
 on

Quantum Frontiers
—the first in a series of three—
Dominik Hangleiter
 discusses the question of whether quantum advantage (also known as “quantum supremacy”) has been achieved. (Update, Jan. 26: here is Dominik’s 
second post;
 March 4: here is Dominik’s 
third post
.)

Dominik describes polling audiences of experimental and theoretical physicists (with a few computer scientists) at recent talks, expecting overwhelming agreement that quantum advantage had already been demonstrated. Instead, he found that 
less than half of the audience believed this to be the case
, despite several experimental claims since 2019 and even earlier quantum simulation results.

These reactions motivated Dominik’s mini-series, whose goal is to argue that existing quantum computers can already perform tasks beyond the reach of classical computers. In the first post, he reviews the notion of quantum advantage, focusing especially on random circuit sampling experiments, and explains that current claims rely on proxies and extrapolations from classically tractable regimes. He announces that Part 2 will examine the evidence for these claims and address skeptical arguments.

From my perspective, the question of whether large-scale quantum computational advantage has been achieved is a very important one and deserves careful scrutiny. (I myself have worked over the years on assessing this question, as well as the more fundamental question of whether quantum supremacy can be achieved at all.)  Related questions—such as progress toward quantum error-correcting codes and the status of Majorana zero modes—are also of great importance.

Finally, there was 
a remark
 on Dominik’s post from a researcher in India who works in applications of quantum computing for agriculture, and 
coverage
 on a quantum communication 
blog
 based in Pakistan. It is heartwarming to see how science through research in quantum computation can bring together scientists from India and Pakistan.

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like

Loading...

Related