Um, laboratory physics theoretical and model statistical of CNRS and University Paris Saclay who's going to talk about fractal Brownian motions and topology. Thanks a lot. So this is I would say that physicist point of view of how mathematics could talk to biology. So and let me start following [clears throat] the advice of Professor Hanin to start with example of simple random walk. And here it is. So if you have a dog who runs sometime, so then it runs randomly all steps are uncorrelated. So then you can ask where it is after n steps. And after sometime, so and here we are in the standard random walk behavior when the distance scales like square root of number of steps. But let us go to slightly more difficult situation when we [clears throat] have something like that. So the same dog runs in the forest. And the condition is that the trajectory that the length of the that the the path should be contractible. Should belong to trivial homotopy class. And in this case the situation is much more complex because so these [clears throat] these trees can be considered as kind of puncture obstacles which compress the trajectory and just because of the topological interactions with these trees because the path itself is self-intersecting, nothing nothing special. [clears throat] The behavior is completely different. So it you see so that topological interactions play the role of external field. So in generic the question we are interested in can be formulated like that. Uh we have a number we have trajectories. We have a set of trajectories. We have some measure on these trajectories, but we fix uh the topological invariant which cuts off special uh topological trajectories of special topological type. And this is the uh stat- question of statistical physics. Uh we fix somehow the invariant, so it could be either winding number in the simplest possible case or algebraic invariant or something else. And uh we sum over all possible trajectories with the restriction, so this is delta function, with the restriction that we cut off only such that belong to the precise given topological state. That is the generic question. Uh we can go to more specific question and uh consider the situation that we are interested in only unknotted or unentangled trajectories. And &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; so then the generic question is such that is the measure effective measure which remains after the cutting off all uh trajectories of given topological state, does it change or not? Uh why this is important? So, it has at least one uh computational challenge because we know that it's very hard to compute uh for instance uh Wiener measure with non-Abelian topological invariants, but then if we know that for instance uh trivial path forms special sub sub &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; uh some sub measure, I don't know how to say, some some some part of trajectories with special fractal dimension. So, then we can forget about we can forget about topology and fix the fractal dimension and then play with this ensemble. Uh why there are difficulties? And here are the the the just the main examples why for instance the simple winding number is in applicable in this multi uh multi punctured uh case. So, this is the famous Poincare counter. So, it is &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; uh it is constructed in such a way that the winding is zero. So, from this point of view the trajectory is trivial because you you wind once in different directions around each obstacle also and the winding is zero, but still the trajectory is entangled. Uh sorry. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; If if you remove at least one obstacle, yeah, so the trajectory becomes contractible. And this uh is the extension to three points in the plane. So, here is absolutely the same as here. You can withdraw any of these and the path path will be fully contractible. Okay, so how to take into account this? Uh So, there are some some methods so that instead of using winding number we can uh can see the random walk on special manifolds which have punctures and each time when we make a turn around the obstacle we should stay on the same Riemann sheet, but I will not go into details in this, but I would prefer to discuss how this is related to biology and to physics. Uh and uh let me give you two motivations. One is coming from uh elasticity of uh polymer networks, and the second is from biology, and the second is the main uh interest of uh our study. Uh so &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; what uh what uh distinguishes good and bad rubbers? Uh how they are entangled, in fact, because the elasticity depends on uh &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; what is the structure of uh subchains. If they are heavily entangled and have uh um configurations like that, so then when you extend uh you you lose the entropy, and they cannot be extended highly uh sufficiently not cannot be extended, but uh if you prepare them in a special clever way that the subchains [clears throat] constituting this uh network are weakly entangled, so then you can ex- expect that uh your your your system uh has uh superelastic properties. Uh but the more interesting and more, I would say, deep and having more biological applications is the question uh concerning the DNA the physics of DNA. So, what is known? So, DNA is the molecule of about 2 m long, for instance, human DNA, and it's captured it's packed in the nucleus, which is of 20 microliters. Uh nanometers, and &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; um during the transcription, what should happen? You should take off some part of DNA, so then the ribosome should run along this part, the information should be copied, and then this part should fold again. How to do that reversibly and quickly? Cuz typically you can get stuck in in in situation like that. Uh So, and in fact uh we enter in the following question which can be formulated in mathematical language. Uh suppose that you have very long trajectory, uh you have unknot, yeah? So, you have closed random walk, you put it in a small box uh in such a way that uh it forms the the it has the the fixed density, and then you shake it for sufficiently long time. So, you thermalize your system. So, then uh the question is what you would expect for the internal structure. Either different subparts, like for instance red and green parts, are mutually entangled, or they stay separated. And the question is uh what nature prefers. And the answer is that it prefers the second one. It looks that it's very improbably that that uh the all subparts are segregated uh and make some kind of crumpled structure. But uh I will try to convince you in uh few next slides that actually this could happen. And uh first, let me try to uh form this structure just by hands. How we can do that? So, we can start with a long linear chain, and then make some small folds. So, then we can make folds of folds making sausage. Yeah? So, and then we can proceed recursively. So, and finally what we will have we will have set of embedded hierarchical folds, which uh finally can be viewed as kind of three-dimensional piano curve or Hilbert curve. Uh And the question is whether it's stable or not. And the answer is yes, uh but first let me uh show you uh some numerical verifications of that. After the afterwards, I will provide you some kind of mathematical rigorous arguments behind this, but first historically it was uh &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; found also in uh numerical simulations in MIT group. Uh what is that? So, this is exactly the same structure, but uh painted in the rainbow rainbow bow uh rainbow colors. So, why this painting is important? Suppose that you have very long chain, and then you paint it just from one end to another one, and this painting allows you to understand that close along the chain monomers are close in space as well. Otherwise, your colors will be mixed. Uh So, and this uh first So, this is not uh this is not just a drawing. This is a result of numerical simulations, uh very long run uh in MIT. And uh later I will return to this picture showing you some other example of that. So, and typically [clears throat] looking at that we can ask what is the fractal structure, what is the fractal dimension of this chain? And the answer is that because along the because each monomer monomers which are closed along the chain are closed in the space, so the typical fractal dimension of this structure is the same of the fractal dimension of the space where it is embedded. So, the fractal dimension is three in this case. Uh so, this how this structure looks like if it would be perfect. So, this just to so the image to have an impression how this how it's embedded in 3D space and that is what it resembles. Uh yeah. In fact, it may be too strong to say that the the chromatin structure, the DNA structure looks like fast food. Uh Okay. Now, what was determined experiment experimentally? Uh People have DNA fragments, so they they have cartography of this DNA, they know what is position of which fragment and what they can do, they can they [clears throat] can determine uh they can determine uh the following. Uh if you have uh if you have two fragments separated by some distance, so here is length of the part equal to S, so then they ask what is the probability that two fragments separated by this distance meet each other in the space. And very roughly one can estimate this in the following way. So, if we suppose that ends are uniformly distributed inside the sphere of radius R. So, then in three-dimensional space is like that is one over volume and &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; everything else depends on the fractal dimension. If we would have just a random walk, so then we substitute R as for the random walk in three-dimensional space. Then the probability is 1 over 3 over fractal dimension. If D is equal to 2, so then this will be 3/2. Otherwise, if we have crumples, so then the size of this crumple is of order of S in power 1/3 and so therefore the probability decays like 1 over S. So, and the distinguishing between the decay of 1 over S and 1 over 3/2, so it's sufficient to find the fractal structure. And that was determined in this paper which actually started the new era the new I would say understanding of how DNA is packed in cells. Okay, so uh good. Now, what we can do analytically, how we can try to understand this behavior. And let me simplify the situation instead of working in three-dimensional space. Let us consider for on the random walks in this in in thin slit. Yeah? So, like quasi two-dimensional image of of the same structure. And I will simplify the situation even more considering the [clears throat] two-dimensional square lattices. Suppose that I do the following. Here, I play the the the the following game. I have the carpet, yeah, like that. And then I randomly put over and under crossings. And the first question which is eligible to ask is what is the typical complexity of this of this structure. And since we are on the lattice, now we can use all machinery of algebraic invariants because for instance, we know that Jones invariant is a kind of partition function related to Potts model. Potts is extension of Ising model. So, we can transfer the language of topology into the language of statistical physics of glassy systems where there is a randomness in over-under crossings. So, and uh in this case, we can estimate the average complexity. And the answer is that is proportional to number of So, the the uh the the total uh knot is very weekly uh simplified. So, the the complex is proportional to number of vertices. But now, and that is the crucial point, let us do the following. Suppose that we are very clever and we create the unknot from the very beginning. So, this blue red curve together is unknot. So, we know that this is topologically trivial situation. Now, what we do? We cut part of it and we reclose the ends. So, we we just forget uh we forget about the red part, yeah, and we just reclose the end and ask, under the condition that the parent knot is trivial, what is the typical complexity of the remaining part? And then we do that on all steps. We cut then part of the part, part of the part, and so on, and so forth. And the answer is interesting, is that the complexity so that each sub part remembers that it was a part of highly uh so unknotted ring. And that is the answer because it means that uh on each on on each sub part uh you remember that you are the part of unknot, so and therefore they each each sub part is uh weakly entangled. And if you would try to think how it's possible to embed this in three-dimensional space, the only one possibility is to stay to to to allow to not to allow long loops, to stay uh segregated on all scales. And uh the this idea come from uh the random matrix theory because you can ask the following question. Suppose that you have the product of uh the product of uh SL2 matrices. Yeah, so they are random, and then you just multiply them, and you ask how the highest eigenvalue grows. Yeah? So this is well known first in the written room. But now, just returning to the previous question, we can do the following. We can impose the condition that we know for from the very beginning that this is matrix unit. This product is unit matrix. What is the probability uh what is the highest eigenvalue of sub part of this matrix? And the answer is that it behaves uh like that, so it's not uh it uh it has sub sub sublinear behavior. And so this one can translate back uh to to the language of uh knots, braids, and ask the same question for braids. So we have braid which is which produces the trivial knot. We have uh cut it in half part half braid, and then ask what is the complexity, the answer is the same. Uh Okay. So, and this is the example of numerical simulation which is more involved than the previous picture. And this shows you the uh So, this figure corresponds to as I said, we have a loop which is not entangled and we put them in small box, shake and thermalize and I look for its fractal structure. So, and this is the same if we allow intersections. So, here we have no topology. Here topology exists. So, and you see that even visually there is a difference. Here you have kind of territories where the colors stay close to each other where here is much more mixed. Okay, so that is one way. And the second and the last one is what happens if you go backwards? Uh so, till now I I was telling about how we from topology go to the fractal structure. And now we can ask the reverse question. If we generate somehow the trajectories with fractal dimension less than two, less than random walk so which are compact, whether they will be less less entangled or not. And the answer is yes. Uh we have some special procedure which allows us to generate the compact uh fractal Brownian motions and you see that they look like again they they in some sense they resemble the structure which we have I have shown you on the previous slide. So, it's it has territories colors taste close to each other, meaning that the parts of the chain parts along the chain are the same makes um special crumples in the space. Uh and here is what what is shown here. Here are different fractal dimensions. So, this is standard random walk. So, and then it becomes less and less compact or more and more compact. Yeah? So, here is the fractal dimension close to three. Uh okay. So, and now having this structure, what we can do we can So, once we have generated the patterns, we can define the topological invariants. And here is the distribution of &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; uh uh knots uh for different fractal dimensions. Uh So, as you can see, the black curve corresponds to fractal dimension equal to two. So, typically we estimated So, there are different ways to estimate the fractal dimension to estimate the complexity of the knot. Uh as I said, one is uh &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, we we use different ones. They they can inside. One one we which we which is possible to use is the logarithm function of Jones invariant because this defines the degree of Jones invariant which which itself can be considered as a kind of complexity as a knot complexity of the knot. Uh but here we used also logarithm of Alexander polynomial taken at some special point to distinguish discriminate knots. Of course, we are uh we we can fail in the sense that this invariant is not complete, but modulus this, they they still uh we we can see difference in diff- for different fractal dimensions. We have many complex knot knots for uh standard random walk and much less complex knots for uh more compact uh trajectories. So, and now just kind of conclusions which which I can uh make is the following. So, &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; speaking forward, so that is that uh looking at the topology of So, we we are playing uh the game which is just at the border between uh statistical physics of random walks and probability of random walks and uh low dimen- low dimensional topology. Uh but this was I would say uh the advantage of of uh of this study was that uh it was experimentally supported, observed, and uh the this started the kind of uh new understanding how the uh genome works and uh what is the uh structure of uh DNA in in cells. Uh of course, what I was saying is just the beginning because now the situation is much more involved, and uh so it's mhm &gt;&gt; uh biologists always say that we are too simple, but still uh at least I'm understanding uh it happen. Uh backwards, if we have and this uh subject is less elaborated, so topology of uh fractal Brownian motion. Uh much more difficult problem because uh random because uh fractal Brownian motion is not um conformal invariant. Uh So, in fact uh in first part we used uh in many cases the the fact of uh conformal invariance of Laplacian operator. Here is is much more difficult question to actually elaborate uh other methods. It's still under study. And uh finally uh that's maybe kind of computational challenge because we can wash out the topology and play just with the fractal dimension. And uh so then still we are would be able to study uh highly um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; densely packed uh random walks. Uh okay, so probably at that I will end. Okay, questions. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; Hello. So, uh do you know anything about how in this uh DNA case you mentioned uh how the biology solves this problem of first dispersing spreading out the DNA and then coming back to an organized state? Because it's also important to the same. Okay, the DNA is sometimes very highly organized. Right. Because some some instances you assemble itself in a clearly defined chromosomes and so on. Okay, so and what is the question? How this process goes between either between like some kind of thermodynamical situation where everything is spread out according to piano and then going back to highly organized state. Okay. So this is not the subject of this talk &gt;&gt; Okay, yes, I'm sorry. I was concentrated on the question what is the typical structure of the DNA. I would say just before it gets active. Yeah? So In fact, I don't know what what to answer how to answer your question. So probably I don't know whether the topology plays a role there or not and so generic But it's the question is something like this that if you take if you had a picture of a kitten, right? The kitten was working with yarn. And how to go backwards? Back and forth. So you it's like a crazy If you're if you are heavily entangled, so then you are then you get stuck. So the the the only one possibility is just to to to stay in the crumpled in situation and to fold back reversibly. Mhm. Yeah. Okay. More questions? So, let me ask you some question. So, is this very surprising that uh this uh DNA does this kind of behavior? So, for example, when it's unzipped and then zips back, you would imagine locally there are so many entanglements, but I see no reason at the tip of the zipper entangles with something at the very bottom of it. So, of course, I would imagine this local structure. And entanglement of the top part and the bottom part, is this not expected? &gt;&gt; Uh so, again, uh you are talking about different phase of DNA. So, this is not the case. So, here as you as you could see, uh I I didn't talk about double fold the structure about um helix structure. I talked about the I imagined that the DNA is just a single strand, so it doesn't matter for me because in this phase uh we were interested in the global packing. So, this is not the case the question of zipping and zipping because uh &gt;&gt; No, but I mean but I mean I don't exactly know what to do. Another example, in the example of palm trees, you had this guy run walks, so the fractal dimension was two. Four. &gt;&gt; And the And the palm tree's case was four, and the just a sphere was two, right? &gt;&gt; Four. The sphere without the tree. Two. &gt;&gt; So, you if you tell me that the fractal dimension in the palm tree's picture is two, then I would immediately imagine that well, that means it's just a bunch of balls. And the chance of this guy getting out of his local balls is very low, so his fractal dimension is very low. So, isn't it? So, I would think ah okay, maybe the speed he goes around the center of the balls is much more than he going from one region to another region." So, I would think some kind of multi-scale phenomenon is Absolutely. You are right. Of course, when I was talking about structure like that, of course, there is or maybe even this one. Of course, there is a minimal scale from each I can start. Yes? Yeah. So, and that that that depends on the external condition, on kind of interactions between uh uh three-body interaction, so it's two-body interaction, so it's like &gt;&gt; I see. standard phenomenon. But, the question is what happens on the large scales? On large scales, this what I described, yes. I see. Maybe a curious question is as another friend of ours, who coughs, is working on these knots and unknots. Yeah. &gt;&gt; One question, did you try to Let's say you give me a very complicated projection of a knot, right? We want to see is it unknot or knot? Maybe you can implement your random processes. You kind of wiggle it and see whether it decomposes into chambers. Uh &gt;&gt; You move it a You mean You mean something like that? Yeah, I give you a very complicated picture and then I start shaking it and then I see, "Oh, I see tiling of a small knots here and there." Uh This is interesting question and in fact uh I am a bit excited with these kind of things because uh the they stay just on the border of spin glass theory and knot theory. Why spin glass? Because uh this is not So, for instance, if if we are talking about Kauffman polynomial, so then it can be represented as a Potts partition function. And Potts partition function depends on whether uh the the randomness is whether you stay up or down. So and then you can use all machinery in spin glasses like mathematicians don't like that like for instance replica three curves things like that. Of course there is another language so you are talking about probably AI recognition of knots. No? &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I know not necessarily. I'm just saying we can maybe kind of deform it with a random process and then see whether the whole knot can decompose into smaller knots. So somehow tiling of the knots by the simpler I mean statistics I haven't I haven't example this but what you are saying is related to the following question. If for instance you have a braid not the not the knot. So then uh typically you can ask you can paint some string and you can ask how it spreads between others. Yeah. And the answer is that probably they are localized in the sense that they form kind of narrow regions where they where they run. And this is I would say this is not known but this is under study and I was slightly cheating you when I presented this picture of of forest. So this one. Yeah, because this answer the fractal dimension for this one over four is valid only if you have a perfect regular lattice of these trees. If you would have cavities, so then immediately you will get kind of localization of this random walk. Yeah. And on the level of topology, not very well known what happens. Great, thanks. Yeah. More questions, if any? Yeah. No more? You need to use microphone. People cannot hear you. So you started with like uh this knots with open ends, but like the trajectory of the dog etc., but you model all of them with like closed structures, right? Uh yeah, but this is the issue of random walks. So if you have open trajectory or closed trajectory, the typical space distance is the same. So it's it doesn't depend on whether you have so-called bridge or not. So it's open or closed, so they are they have some just numerical factor which which they differ. But of course, if you will open the trajectory in the forest, you will immediately run in the region of standard random walk because here the most important thing is just topological interaction. If you open all configurations are allowed and you are again in random walk case. Thank you. More questions? Okay, if not, let's thank Sergey again. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; Thank you.
