Standard Model 7: Pions
This time I’m talking about pions:
Pions were a revolutionary discovery in the 1930s—part of the first wave of the ‘particle zoo’—but I’m explaining them as a way to work toward the math and physics concepts needed for the Standard Model.
As soon as the neutron was discovered in 1932, Heisenberg invented the idea of ‘isospin’, and the idea that the proton and neutron are two different isospin states of a single particle, the ‘nucleon’.   This is why I spent 3 videos explaining the math of spin-1/2 particles: in order to talk about
isospin
.
Three years later, Yukawa came up with the idea that the force holding nuclei together is carried by a new particle.   Even better, he predicted the mass of this yet-unseen particle!  It’s a fun bit of physics but also a step toward the concept of
gauge bosons
.
Later, the pion was discovered: in fact, three kinds of pions!  I begin to explain how these three pions form a basis of
just as the proton and neutron form a basis of
These theories are outdated, but their math gets reused in the Standard Model.  We’ll eventually get around to that!
Related
This entry was posted  on Monday, March 23rd, 2026 at 6:35 pm and is filed under
mathematics
,
physics
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the
RSS 2.0
feed.
											You can
leave a response
, or
trackback
from your own site.
Post navigation
« Previous Post
Next Post »
2 Responses to
Standard Model 7: Pions
Mark
says:
15 April, 2026 at 3:12 am
Wikipedia in their article on Lorentz covariance says that “Lorentz invariance is also violated in QFT assuming non-zero temperature”, with three references supporting that claim:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lorentz_covariance#Lorentz_violating_models
If this is true, doesn’t this fact already break Lorentz symmetry in the standard model of particle physics / our universe, since our universe is about 2.3 Kelvin (a non-zero temperature) due to blackbody radiation from the cosmic microwave background?
Reply
John Baez
says:
15 April, 2026 at 9:19 pm
Mark wrote:
Wikipedia in their article on Lorentz covariance says that “Lorentz invariance is also violated in QFT assuming non-zero temperature”.
This is not mysterious or surprising, and you don’t need to understand QFT to understand this.   Here we are working in the context of special relativity.   In this context temperature can be defined in terms of energy and entropy.  Entropy is Lorentz-invariant, but energy is not.  Thus, like energy, temperature is not a Lorentz invariant concept.
Another explanation: the concept of temperature only applies to systems in thermal equilibrium (or close).   A bunch of radiation in thermal equilibrium is necessarily isotropic: it looks the same in every direction.  If we Lorentz boost this radiation we’ll get radiation that’s no longer isotropic.   So it’s no longer in thermal equilibrium.
If this is true, doesn’t this fact already break Lorentz symmetry in the standard model of particle physics / our universe, since our universe is about 2.3 Kelvin (a non-zero temperature) due to blackbody radiation from the cosmic microwave background?
Now you are switching the subject and talking about
general
relativity: that’s the theory we need to discuss the Big Bang cosmology.   Lorentz transformations are not symmetries of the Big Bang cosmology, so at cosmic scales
nothing
is Lorentz invariant (except perhaps approximately).
Still, it’s mildly interesting that the standard Big Bang cosmology, and the cosmic microwave background, single out a notion of rest.  At rest, we see the cosmic microwave background radiation as isotropic, with a temperature of 2.725 kelvin.   (You got the temperature a bit low: that’s not important.)   If we are moving relative to the cosmic microwave background radiation, it no longer looks isotropic.   Indeed, since the Earth and Sun are moving relative to the cosmic microwave background radiation, we do
not
see it as isotropic.   It’s
stronger in some directions than others
, and using this we can see the Sun is moving at 369.82±0.11 km/s relative to the cosmic microwave background radiation.
So our universe has a notion of rest, and the laws of physics are not truly Lorentz invariant.  But this is irrelevant to particle physics experiments because the effects are miniscule.  For example, when we collide particles to form pions, the probability that they interact with the cosmic microwave background radiation is very low.
Reply
You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked
*
Comment
*
Name
*
Email
*
Website
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ