Um thank you very much for the um invitation. It's a great honor to come to um be one of the speakers in the uh um I'm very happy to talk about the ka in three. Um please feel free to ask questions at any time. This is joint work with Josh Zo. um a ka set in n dimensional ukian space is a bounded subset that contains a unit line segment in every direction. So for example the picture this uh unit um unit ball is one example of a ka set because it's it contains a unit line segment in every direction. And then this the picture on the um on the right hand side is a smaller ka set. So as you can guess this set looks smaller than this unit disk and and one can still put a unit line segment in every direction it's rotating. Um I think this picture was uh previously what uh Ka thought the smallest possible ka set. So originally he asked the following question in 1916 like if one um want to um rotate a needle to to 180 degrees was the smallest area it sweep out. So um he thought this is the smallest area. Um and then the in 19 some people say it's in 1920 basic constructed a ka set of zero area. So the the way the construction goes is you you take a equilateral triangle. So it contains all the unit line segment if you choose this height to be at least one in this 60° uh sector. And so here for the first picture you can just rotate um the line segment from here to here without any um anything um just rotate along this point. And how can you um make the area smaller? Well, you can cut it in half and move the half closer because they have overlap. So this means that they reduce the area by at least this overlap. And here now the way to to do the rotation is follows. You first um rotate this line to this line segment and then you slide this line segment to to here becomes this one. and then you rotate again and then slice back. So if you repeat this process then uh if you make the triangles smaller and then make them overlap more and more then in the end you will get um a set of arbitrary small measure but a set of which you can still hope to rotate your needle or at least it contains a unit like segment in all the directions in this 60deree sector. Um so given that we know a ka set could have a zero measure then how we still want to say that intuitively it shouldn't be too small because after all it contains a line segment in every direction. So how do we quantify um like the size of a set with zero measure. So there is a notion of household dimension um we intuitively when the household dimension is large we think the set is large. So the k set conjecture says that uh any kata set in Rn even though it could have a zero area but it should still have a the maximum household dimension. So so here is a not a rigorous heristic uh for sets with household dimension that we are going to um apply for this lecture. So given a set E in Rn with the heristic that we say that it has household dimension N is as follows. So we can take a small delta on a small scale that's uh very very small close to zero and then we take the delta neighborhood of E. So this N delta E means the delta neighborhood of E and we estimate it measure. So as delta goes to zero this measure should go to zero because um because of basic construction because it should come because there could sorry I should I didn't say it should go to zero I said if a set has um measured zero and but house of this measure n then we we take um the delta neighborhood of e and then let delta goes to zero then this measure should go to zero but the point of having dimension n is that this measure goes to zero um aperture slowly. So it has um measure greater or equal than delta to the epsilum where epsilum is any positive number and it it approaches zero as delta goes zero. Um so roughly speaking this and in other words it says that if we take the delta neighborhood of E we we that the set has a relatively large measure that like delta decays as slow as delta to the epsilon. So um um what this says is that um in the previous basic construction we can just take the delta neighborhood and we can um cut it so that um the the the width of uh each um small triangle has um it delta and then we take its delta neighborhood and we want to show that um for for this picture one can show that the this um delta neighborhood of e we take measure is greater than something like um like one over absolute value of log delta to some power. Um why do we care about ka set? Um so you might think this is just a fun um geometric problem. Um there there is also some story of how um kaka came up with this problem or this set. But uh the reason why I care about kaka assets and maybe many people in in my sub field is its connection to the f analysis. So um in in fa um f analysis is a very um um useful in in many fields beyond mathematics. And in F analysis the central formula is the f inversion formula means that if we take a f transform of a function and then we take the inverse free transform we recover the function for a large class of the function and so it's natural to say that to to ask ourself the following question. So if we take the free transform and we only have the information of the function inside a large ball of radius r. So we when B uh outside of this ball we we don't know anything about about it and then we take the inverse free transform and to what extent can we recover the original function. So this is the ball multiplier conjecture. It says that if we take the for transform function and then multiply by the indicator function of the ball of radius R means it equals to one in in the ball of radius R and zero elsewhere. And then we take the inverse uh free for transform as r goes to infinity. Um the conjecture was that it should converge to our function f which sounds very intuitive and people have proved it in one dimensional case. Um and also this is true in uh so in some uh norm space it's called LP space and this is also true for P equals to two. Uh but it was a big surprise that um Ferman um in the 70s this proved it for any p not equal to two using um construction of zero measure ka set like using precisely this set. Um so this comes with a big surprise and and that is uh why um people in free analysis paid attention to the tech set and and it's true that uh after 1970s there has been a lot of work and many um great mathematicians have um thought about this conjecture. So the two-dimensional case was solved by uh Davis in 1970s and the three-dimensional case um there's been a lot of inferial work by um Jean Tom Wolf and also K label. Um so this I want to highlight this work of Tom Wolf because it's um um it says that any um ka set in R3 has household dimension greater or equal than 2 + 1/2 and and then with a lot of work kal laba and um managed to improve this 2 plus 1/2 by a little bit. um this is um a big breakthrough by them because um uh they identified the reason why it's so hard to um improve Wolf's bond. There was a theoretical barrier. So and last year um Josh and I we approved the conjecture. The conjecture is still open for dimen higher dimensional case. And so why is this um wolf's bound so hard to improve? Um first of all so all these two um um bound the two estimates they use um elementary but highly non-trivial method and in particular wolf's um method it works for a much more general class of sets not only ka sets um so it uses just the um like geometry of uh lines um meaning that um mostly like two lines intersect they if they intersect they intersect at one point something like that. Um so Cass Laba and Cha they when they were trying really hard to improve this bound they discovered the following Heisenberg group example. So this Heisenberg group example is sharp for Wolf's bound because his method works for more general class of sets including the Heisenberg group set uh in uh in C3. So this um Heisenberg group is as follows. So um this h is um real uh hypersurface in c3 is um the imaginary part of z1 equals to the imaginary part of z2 times u the complex conjugate of z3. So this heisenber group uh contains a four real dimensional family of complex lines. So yes, Wolf's method works not only for real lines, it also works for complex lines so-called segments. Um, so the the complex lines are parame so L st alpha are parameterized by ST in R and alpha in C. So this is indeed for a real dimensional family. One can check that this line is contained in the Heisenberg group. And since Heisenberg group is if we identify C3 with R six and this is a hypers surface in R six. So it has real dimension five and it equals to exactly um five hops times the um the dimension of complex numbers. Um and since Wol's method works equally well for the Heisenberg group with respect to complex lines and the ka sets um in order to pro improve wolf's um method or improve wolf's bound one has to somehow distinguish the heisenber group and the ket. So this is um this is not easy. Um in fact um a lot of people try to um think about this conjecture in our field and especially when we we are young graduate student it's a very tempting to think about this um question and to think about the problem but after you tried for a bit since we didn't have enough experience then your advisor will just pointed to you that okay so how does it distinguish the Heisenberg group and the kas and you realize okay it didn't distinguish so there's no hope to improve it when you try to work on it um in very early in in the career. um and cats laba and to the the way they did it is um they um try to say okay suppose this wolf's bound to is sharp like if there exist a ka set of dimension exactly five halves then they discovered that it has to have a lot of structure and it in particular it has to be sticky grainy and plany so the stickiness we're going to see later and also the structure of grainy and plenty we we're also going to see in in the proof. Um and after they found that much that that uh hypothetical sharp example to a wolves bound should have a lot of structure and then they make use of the u fact that a ket contains a line segment in every direction to um to use this structure to to give um um epsilon improvement. So I this is the picture I found on online that sort of saying that this is like locally grainy and there's like plainy the set should look like a little plane and the plane have a different rotations if you uh look at different location of the set. In fact, uh even though this is a picture I found online about the Heisenberg group, it's uh in the proof when we are trying to um visualize the ka set, usually the enemy case look a lot like um the set and we have to somehow deal with it. Um um so um now I I want to start talk about um some of the proof ideas. Um so first of all um in in this kind of proof we usually use induction on scales. So it's useful to have a scale uh to have a discretized version that is uh let delta to be a small scale. So this is also um matches our previous um sort of intuition of house of dimension n set when we were taking delta neighborhood of a set. So here when we take a delta neighborhood of a line segment it becomes a delta tube. Um the now previously a kasset contains a unit line segment in every direction. So here we are interested in a collection of delta tubes blackboard t that consists of a delta tube in every delta separated direction. It just a discretized version of every direction. It means that on the um unit sphere we take a delta net and on each point of the delta net we we take um a delta tube in this direction. So the discretized um ka set conjecture states that if we have a collection of delta tubes satisfies this kale assumption then the union of the tubes has volume greater approximate than one. So this greater approximate means greater equal than delta to the epsilon for um epsilum like very small as small as possible as delta goes to zero. So if um one can prove this ket conjecture the discretized version uh it's not hard to um prove the house of dimension version via some um classical geometric measure theory argument. So this is the main um statement that we are going to focus and so the statement now looks really easy. It's just that we have a collection of data tubes um in the space and we can arrange it. We can move it in the way that in any way we want but um we want to estimate like how small can the union of tubes um be. Uh now the difficulty with uh working with uh this assumption is that in fact this is also the difficulty on working on the ka set for a long time is that the ka assumption no longer holds after restricting to a smaller box. Um be because when we do induction scales usually what we want to do is that we want to look at things at a smaller scale and then so collect the information by hopefully by induction at a smaller scale and then um collect them and hope to have a a global estimate. But for this kale assumption if we intersect let's say with this yellow box then we get a bunch of um um tube segments. So there's no guarantee that those tube segments will have a distinct directions. They they might all look parallel and there's also no guarantee that it contains one direction in every scale. Similarly, if we uh intersect the set with some uh fat tube and count only um the delta tube inside the fat tube. So in fact this blue fat tube is a natural thing to do because we can look at the things at both scales. So the the delta tube inside the brute tube and and also the brute tubes um themsel um is also a collection of tubes but then it's the same thing happens like there's no guarantee that it contains a delta tube in each delta separated direction that's allowed in this blue tube. So so this um this makes so this means that it's not a good assumption then um how So then what what what should be a more natural assumption. So if um let's look at the more general problems. Suppose we have a set of distinct data tubes. So first of all distinct is natural because otherwise we can just put this all the delta tubes to be parallel and then put them in the same place again and again and it's in the end it's still one delta tube. It doesn't say anything. So we need to say that it's distinct means that T1 and T2 their intersection should have a volume less than half of the volume of one tube. Another question is um given a set of distinct delta tubes how large is the volume of their union um it's so let's just imagine first um we suppose we want to prove the best possible bound. So what what can we put on the right hand side? Um the best possible scenario is when the tubes are all disjointed. So when the tubes are all disjointed then the union of those tubes has volume equal to the number of tubes times the volume of one tube. So this is the scenario when they are all disjointed. Another scenario is that suppose the tubes um since they are all contained in the unit ball they fear out the entire unit ball because they cannot be even bigger then the best possible scenario is that it has volume equal to the volume of the unit ball. So so that is the question is uh for what set of tubes contained in the unit ball since it has length one. So it's natural to to say that it's contained unit ball because otherwise we can just cut space with uh uh different unit balls and estimate what happens inside it. Um we introduce uh we put the delta to the epsom here because um it's um usually for this setting u we allow some um subordinate loss. So this this is the question and it's as we said uh except this delta to the epsilum um the the the right hand side is the best possible and this is the number that this is when they are essentially disjoint and this is when they almost sphere out the the entire space. So now let's um so this question a special case of the question is the ka set conjecture because it says that the ka assumption is one criteria where this happens. Why is this? Because if a set of tubes satisfies the ka assumption it contains one delta tube in every delta separated direction. Then the number of such tubes is um one over the volume of one tube. And if we plug in then this term equals to one and this whole thing is one and then this is exactly the the conjecture in the ka set conjecture. Um now more generally uh since we don't know um whether the K assumption is natural um more generally when we look at um this question um in order to come up with the right assumption it's um usually easier to first try to come up with some some counter examples. So um in in for example in R3 this obstruction also happens in all higher dimensions. It's not hard to see the following. U let we can consider an a * b * 1 rectangular box w where a b are greater or equal than delta. And let's say let's now try to think how many distinct delta tubes can we put in w. So we first say we can we want to put many and then we try to see how many is um does does it um make this um s may fail. So the all the the tubes since since they are contained in W then the union of them is also contained in W. So we have the volume upper bound and we hope that it since W is let's say smaller than the unit ball. So we hope that it is greater than um it is they are almost disjoint and for this to happen it implies that the number of tubes is less approximate than uh the volume of w divided by volume of t. But in fact one can put a lot more tubes in it. So this is uh the like the number of uh distinct directions of tubes we can put in and each direction we can put also this many uh parallel tubes in it. So in total one can put as much as the volume of w divided by the volume of t square many distinct delta tubes. And if we put this many delta tubes in W then it it is um so this is a counter example to this estimates and that's why we want to avoid it and so it's natural to define the following that is called the density of tubes in a rectangular box. So, so this uh definition was uh um we first uh used in Wolf's paper um and this is a definition that's also motivated from this example. So we want to some force the number of [snorts] tubes to be bounded by volume of W divided by by volume of T because that is what um makes um the desired estimate to be true. Then we define the density of tubes in W as the number of tubes contained in W times the volume of one tube um divided by the volume of W. So in particular if the set of tubes satisfy this then the density of tubes here is bounded by one because the number of tubes is less than volume of W divided by volume of T and they cancel out then this is bounded by one. So now for let's just make um bold um guess on this um question. So it's it's sort of a necessary um um condition that we want the density to be less or approximate than one in any rectangular box. So that is what we call um the maximum density and we say that a set of tubes contained in the unit ball satisfies the castile wolf aims if the maximal density is bounded approximate than one because we don't want any of this um bad example happen. Um so this is indeed what we proved. Um we showed that if a set of tubes satisfies the castile wolf aums means that the maximum density or the density in any rectangular box is bounded approximate than one in in R3 then the union of tubes uh has volume greater approximate than the number of tubes times the volume of one tube and in other words then the set of tubes are essentially disjoint. Um let's now take some time to digest this key definition. Um first it comes from the obstruction and and it's like it's necessary condition but the theorem we proved says that it's also a sufficient condition and it implies that the number of tubes is bounded by one over the volume of the one tube because if we if we take W to be the unit ball then the density of tubes in the unit ball. So even though unit ball is not a rect rectangular box we can like say cover it by the unit cube and then the density of tubes in inside this unit ball is less than one implies that the number of tubes times the volume of one tube is less than one. So it implies that if a set of tubes uh satisfies the castile wolf aim it the number of of such tubes is less than uh one over the volume of one tube and also um since we said that this is the castile wolf aum is almost like a necessary and sufficient condition. So it implies the castile wolf. It sorry it imp it implies the ka set conjecture in R3 because a ket conjecture concerns um a set of tubes satisfies the ka assumption k and this ka assumption is a stronger assumption. It implies the this cast wolf axum because um now suppose we have a set of tubes that consists one delta tube in every delta separated direction and we want to verify if it satisfies the cast wolf aim. So the way to do it is we take any rectangular box W and then we want to estimate the number of tubes contained in W. So we just bound the po number of possible directions of u of delta tube we can put in w and this corresponds to the number of delta caps fits in this a * b rectangle on the unit sphere and this is bounded by a divided by delta square which is exactly uh the volume of w divided by the volume of t and this is equivalent to the density of tubes in w is less than one and since we take an arbitrary W this means that the maximum density of tubes is less than one. So, so this is um like sort of the this is the setup we take in the end uh to to prove the conjecture we have to prove a more generalized version and because this more more general version even though it's harder but um it's um sometimes when you do induction um making the statement harder is is making your life easier because uh it means that when you induct you have more information to use and so finding the right generalization is sometimes is usually um a key step and and for the ka set problem in R3. Um so this is the generalization we take we took. Um so before going to um talk about the proof strategy with um this um definition I I want to talk a little bit about um um projection theory um because um some of the proof proof steps uh have inspiration or borrowed tools from the uh recent developments in projection theory. um in in particular this sticky to general approach. So what does a projection theory um what is it about? It's a even simpler problem to state than the kass set conjecture. It just says that um suppose we're in we have a set in Rn. Let's just set let's just consider n equals to two. We have a a subset of let's say r2. So that they are those white points and we have a collection a collection of subspaces. So in in the case of R2 we just let's say we have a collection of lines and then we study the orthogonal projection we want to say that for one of the subspace the orthogonal projection of my set to the subspace. For example here if we take this line the orthogonal projection are just uh those yellow points. We want to say that the orthogonal projection to one of the subspace is large. Um and this is um what the projection theory um want to study. Um so there is there there is a classical result by Mr and Matula. They says that so for almost every subspace um for almost every um m dimensional subspace V in Rn uh this the household dimension of the orthogonal projection PV means orthogonal projection to to of E to B uh the household dimension of the orthogonal projection equals to the minimum of the household dimension of E and and the um dimension of V that's M. So this is again the best possible because because orthogonal projection is a a lift map. It does not uh it cannot increase the house of dimension when E is a bar set and it cannot have dimension greater than the dimension of the space that we are projecting to. So this is really the best possible and also this term is kind of similar to the right hand side of the question we ask about union of tubes. um because this M is where the um the entire space is and this is as if we didn't have any um loss. Um so um Mron and Matilda give a like the best possible answer if we have almost every m dimensional subspace in RM. But the challenge is when um we don't have access to all almost all m dimensional sub subspace. For example, if we take lambda to be a lower dimensional subset of um the the grass man um in particular when suppose m is some curve in fact uh the ka conjecture could be rephrased as a special case when lambda is some curve of this orthogonal projection problem and and this is still um very difficult um problem and it's even hard to come up with the right conjunction structure in general in higher dimensional space. Uh but uh in some lower dimensional version or some special um place we people manage to make progress and a lot of progress are made via the following uh general approach. So we first um study some of those um problems uh in a special class of sets. we call it sticky sets and that that has a similar properties at all scales. Um and once we have proved our desired um estimates for the sticky sets then one can generalize uh to uh the general sets that we care about uh using induction scales and multiscale analysis. So for the sorry yes &gt;&gt; can you clarify a little bit the challenge and what is the problem? &gt;&gt; Yes. So uh the problem is that so this uh uh we suppose in the space of m dimensional subspaces in Rn that's the in the grass manion we have a a subset lambda means a collection of um the m dimensional subspace in particular for example lambda is like a curve and a grass manium and and then we want to find some point in This curve mean that some m dimensional subspace such that the orthogonal projection is large and and this is not clear because for the mron and matilas um theorem it needs almost all mational subspace but we only have a curve instead. So the the easiest problem is probably let's say con consider this um unit uh sphere and then if you have all directions in the unit sphere then at at least one of the direction you have very good projection bound but what happens if you can have only some curve on the unit sphere can you find a direction in this curve such that you have a good projection bound and and this is not obvious. Um yeah one we we had some result when the curve has a really nice curvature but uh in general it's it's really hard and also in in general when um this for example when m is two n is four um and that is exactly the kasa conjecture in a free scenario for for some the special curve um and do you search for one for many inside uh inside lambda &gt;&gt; as long as you have one then it's not hard to say that for almost all said in lambda. Yeah. Um so uh for the this is a general um approach as you can see later there are some other theorems that that uses this approach but for the ka set conjecture in R3 let me just say that um to imagine the sticky sets in fact all the sets we have seen before are sticky for example the basic coach construction is sticky and the Heisenberg group if you put in the context of uh like let's say uh complex lines it's also sticky and but one have to also keep in mind that um the sticky sets are just a very tiny subset of the whole possible sets. So even though in our imagination the all the bad sets are sticky but it doesn't say that one could just work on sticky sets and just claim that it holds for every other case. Um and also I should remark that um since previously we say that the Heisenberg group lives in C3 and the kaset lives in R3 and this is important because we want to uh separate them and it is in the sticky case that one can use boans discretite sum product theorem like consequence of boans discretise sum product theorem to distinguish the two example. examples. So this um to overcoming this difficulty happens in the sticky case. Um so there are um uh theorems proven using this approach um in two dimensions for the first set conjecture um that I won't have time to talk about it now and I think I covered it in in Monday's lecture and and then also the kat set conjecture in three there are still the open problems for example the there is a problem called faulner distance set conjecture um where the sticky case was proved by Thomas Opponent 10 years ago and in fact this is the problem the conjecture that I first tried very hard to say okay we know we have the sticky case can we do it put for general case and it didn't go anywhere um so it it's still open um and it's not clear how to do um how to do from from here to here for the faulner distance problem also now now that the AI had so many disproofs maybe maybe one can also think about whether it's true so anyway um and for now let's go back to the ket conjecture um so for we first proved the the sticky case um based on ideas of cats and um so it was the the ideas a lot of the ideas are outlined in TA's blog um it says that if um a set of tubes is sticky in R3 we we're going to see the definition in a minute then the we have the desired estimate and then um using this theorem sticky ka theorem as a blocks as a black box uh we we managed to uh u make it work for the general ka set in fact any set of tubes satisfies the castile wolf aum in R3 that's even more general than a ka set. Um so now what's the definition of a sticky ka set? Um I should also say that for different problem the notion of stickiness is different. So um here um our notion of sticky kassad is as follows. A set of t delta tubes contained in a unit ball is sticky if for any row between delta and one. Uh the collection of row tubes t row means the set of row tubes covering the delta tubes uh satisfy also satisfy the cast wolf aum. Um so what does this mean? Um it means that for any delta tube in t there exists a row tube contained in t row. um and that contains the delta tube. For example, uh in this I don't know if you can see it very clearly, but for example, in this um picture on the right hand side, uh those green tubes are the road tubes and the set and the T row uh collection of row tubes satisfies the castile wolf action means the maximal density of the row tubes um is bounded is less approximated than one. In particular, this means that the number of row tubes should be less approximate than row to the minus2. Um, so uh okay, it's unfortunate that the the the purple tubes are invisible. So, but one can try to imagine that this set is uh satis the the both uh those white tubes are delta tubes. Both of them satisfies the castile wolf axum. But the this um the picture on the left hand side is not sticky because even though the purple tubes are invisible but you can imagine for this set you need a lot of purple tubes to cover it the delta the road tubes to cover it and if a a road tubes a set of road tubes satisfies a cast wolf axum then they shouldn't be too many but uh the picture on the left hand side says shows that it requires a lot of them so it's not sticky. And the picture on the right hand side is sticky at least at scale row means that the those green tube needs to cover it also satisfies the castile wolf action. So even like in this picture it's also it it it also kind of illustrate that the worst sticky because as you can see this um those white tubes they are sort of stick to each other. Um so the advantage of a sticky ka set is that it works really well for inductional scales. It means that uh for any row between delta and one the collection the set of row tubes and also the delta tubes inside one row tube after rescaling they are all sticky. Um so this means that if if we zoom in or if we thicken the tubes they they become the same in in the same class of sticky tubes. So so we can just apply induction. Um now let's uh use um the the sticky ka theorem as a black box and then try to um see um some of the ideas that um generalize the sticky case to an any set of tubes that satisfies the castile wolf aum. So here is the setup. Um the set of tubes satisfies a cast wolf aum. It has a density bounded approximate the tube density in any rectangular box bounded approximate than one. Um for simplicity let's also assume that the number of tubes is approximately delta to the minus2. So this is a white lie but um to this makes our life a lot easier and suppose the set of tubes is not sticky because if it is sticky then we are done by the sticky ka theorem. So not sticky. This means that for some row um the the row tubes does not satisfy the casttop wolf vacuum. So when in the case when the delta tubes are exact exactly delta to the minus2 this means that the number of row tubes is much greater than row to the minus2. So usually this is a bad scenario. But the the point of this um argument says that well this also can be turned into some good thing we can use. So one of the key step is we are going to use this um to say that to improve our bound. So um so this is the setup and this is the information we have about our collection of tubes and and we are the the quantity we are going to estimate is called the multiplicity of tubes. So mu t is the number of tubes times the volume of one tube divided by the u volume of the their union. So this is uh roughly speaking the number of tubes through a typical point in the union of tubes. Um so the goal is to show that the multiplicity of tubes is bounded approximate by one because this is equivalent as the volume of union of tubes is greater approximate than the number of tubes times the volume of one tube which is the bound we want to show. So to um bound the multiplicity of tubes, let's say this yellow point is um one of the typical point and those yellow tubes are the delta tube. So now in this picture we have six delta tubes passing through it. So we have the multiplicity tubes at this point is six and we want to apply induction of scales and we are going to sort um the tubes u passing through this point according to their angle. So we are going to put um the multiplicity of tubes is approximately after pigeon hauling the multiplicity of tubes inside t row times um so first of all um let's just first see the multiplicity of tubes inside t row. So we have those two tubes in t row that passing through this yellow point. Since they have angle less or equal than row it they it means that if they intersect they stay intersect for some um for a little while and they intersect into a segment of length delta over row. So this is just delta and then this angle is row. So the length is delta over row. Um so one can decompose the multiplicity of tubes into um this multiplicity of tubes inside uh this um road inside a road tube and then since they intersect into segments then this mean then we have to add a different another factor that is the multiplicity of the segment those blue segments. So here we have three segments intersect at this point. Um th this um this decomposition it holds in general after pigeon holeing. Um and there is also a different decomposition that people usually use that is we bound the multiplicity of tubes by the multiplicity of tubes inside t row times the multiplicity of t row. This means times the number of row tubes passing through it. So this quantity also seems pretty natural. But it becomes very wasteful when the tubes are non sticky because and when the tubes are not sticky we have a lot of row tubes the number of row tubes is much bigger than row to the minus2. So even um the expectation we should expect a lot of road tubes passing through arbitrary point and and this is what um makes non sticky sets very difficult to estimate because usually people just use this and and then the the best we can get is is very large. Um so it seems that um we should go for the first decomposition but there is also some issue with the first decomposition. Um the this first decomposition we have to estimate the multiplicity of those grains. Um grains just means this delta time delta times delta over row segment that comes from the intersection of tubes inside row tube. But we know nothing about the grains. For the tubes, we have a lot of information. That's the whole setup, right? This cast wolf aum and also no not sticky. Um, but for the grains, we don't know anything about it. So the one thing we know is that okay since the grains have length delta over row we can just cover by those delta over row balls and only interested on those grains that contain in the delta overrow ball and we can rescale it to have length one and they and then they become a road tubes. So it seems that at least in terms of dimensions they are comparable means the set the collection of grains and also the collection of t-roll because the grains after rescaling become a collection of row tubes but then for t-roll we get some information about it because they are like the thickening of the original set of tubes but those information are not always helpful because for the non-sticky set of tubes this might be just extremely large collection of tubes that then the multiplicity does not help us but for the grains we have no information. So the strategy is that we are going to find the structure in the set of grains and then use the structure to show that one of the following holes. Either the multiplicity is very small and then we win using the fact that the tubes are not sticky and is much smaller compared to the multiplicity of t row. Or we can show that the union of tubes has a very large local density for some radius that's bigger than delta. A typical B top um intersect to the union of tubes has a large um volume. So so when the union of tubes has a large local density. This means that uh we can just thicken the tubes to scale towel and apply some version of induction and be and this induction is not it's it's not going to hurt us because uh it has already a large local density and how do we find a structure in an arbitrary set of um row tubes. So um so so let's now just look at this picture and imagine the tubes are like this spaghetti and for this picture the natural structure will just be okay we take two boxes this one and this one to cover them and this is essentially the what this u finding structure proposition says um it says that uh for any set of road tubes contained in the unit ball. Um, one can find a a refinement like a subolction that almost as large as the original set of tubes and also a set W of A * B * 1 boxes and each of the W will serve as the the box that we drew here. um and such that the boxes W's themselves satisfies the castile wolf axums. So it's just some generalization of the cast wolf action we saw for the tubes themselves and for every um W in our collection um it contains a lot of um our tubes in the sense that the tubes um contained in W have maximum density um attained by W. So this is a a dual definition that we call the frostman wolf aum. It just means that for any uh rectangular box U contained in W, the density of tubes U is bounded by the density of tubes in W. So it means that the maximum density is contained is attained by W and and then as um so this is like a cousin theorem we proved saying that if a set of tubes satisfy this frostman Wolf action in W then it essentially fears out W. So it gives the answer to the second term in the question we want to study. So this factor pro factoring proposition is like finds out the structure of the tubes by um by finding the W's. Um so when the the difficulty is that so the proof of this factoring proposition is mostly just by pigeon hauling but a lot of pigeon holing um oops and and then the difficulty is that this a stopped oops um the difficulty is that this a and b they are not uh uh we we don't have any control. So they they are given to us by the set of row tubes. When for example a and b equals to row then w is just t prime it says that the previous set of tubes satisfies the cast wolf a maximum and let's just look at what happens in this case. So when a equals to row then the w's after some refinement is just the original set of grains. So by induction this u multiplicity. So um when in in the in the first case when a b equals to row then this means that then the the grains they are um just the ws themselves in particular the set of grains satisfy the castle wolf aumes. So suppose that this induction hypothesis is that for any set of tubes satisfies the cast wolf aum the multiplicity is bounded by the number of tubes to beta. Suppose this is the induction hypothesis. But in this particular case plus the assumption that the set of tubes are non sticky, we can show that in fact the multiplicity has to be much smaller because this is the first decomposition. And then for the first term we can apply induction. For the second term at the special case when the grains satisfy the cast wolf axum we can also apply induction. So this is bounded by the number of grains to beta which is less than row to the minus2 because it satisfies the cast war aum and then this is much less than the number of row tubes and then altogether it says that it's much less than the number of tubes to beta. So, so this um this is uh concludes the the um gives the self-improving statement in this in the case when a and b equals to row when a is much larger than row then one can apply just thicken the the tubes um using the um the heristic that the set of tubes essentially feel out w so we can thicken it without m without much loss and Then the third case is much more difficult than it it says that the um roughly speaking the tubes becomes a union of those like wider um like planks which serves as grains and then we have to estimate their intersection whether it's transversal or tangential and then a lot of pictures and and yeah so so I think I will stop here. Thank you very much. Um, are there any questions? &gt;&gt; So, so thank you. I've I've seen your talk several times but I understand more and more each time. So it's great. Um so um there is a the finite field version of kaka conjecture is has been proven some few years ago by v and it's much simpler. It builds on the polomial method. Is there any chance that one can draw a parallel between the two proofs. &gt;&gt; Um so um the only um thing that I know is that there from that method you can generalize to the piodic &gt;&gt; ka &gt;&gt; and I think our method can also be moved to to pi kaka. So for the pi ka you have a very different proofs. &gt;&gt; Okay. So two proofs. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But the like if you go to finite field and then move to real I don't know how much the method could translate to each other and also Monday there was a a discussion about the algebraic sets and and uh is there a connection between this algebraicity and the polomial method which is in in ver &gt;&gt; um So I think uh Larry was inspired by Z de to develop this PNO method and then when we they are here and the collaborators are are um like developing this paranormal partition method for the kaset problem and then then they've they realized that the even simpler problem like the paranormal wolf aum whether it's true is not known was not known and And that's what the cats and Rogers proved using um using real algebra geometry. &gt;&gt; Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thanks for the questions. &gt;&gt; Any other? Yeah. um in dimension and is it known uh that uh at least grows linearly in dimension the the out of dimension the kakaya sets &gt;&gt; uh yes so I think wolf's method like wolf's argument gives you um something like um m plus 2 / 2 that's wolf's bond and um recently using either polomial method or um this arithmetic ka by cast and tal one can prove for some constant times c and this c I think is I I don't want to say something wrong but I think it's bigger than one half maybe 6 or thing um like when n becomes larger. &gt;&gt; Any other question? &gt;&gt; The type of Oh, sorry. Thank you. Um, is there some result of the kind that almost every kak asset has out of dimension n or something like this? I don't know if it even makes sense. &gt;&gt; Uh, yeah. Yeah. So, um, it depends on what probability space that we taken. uh if we say that like a random kaset in the sense that in every direction we take a tube in this direction but at the random uniformly at random then I think you you can prove it uh there is also um something called let's say sl2 kaka asset that's um that's if we um that's not probability spatial but uh yeah let me just say that people also consider like restrict the amount of freedom for for choosing the chips and try to prove the kasset contraction in that setting and there are some um some result of this type um but I don't know when you say uh in some probability space almost all because I think as long as we introduce some randomness it's somehow make the problem easier because the pro the this tasa problem really ask you what's the worst case. So I I don't know what was question for us. &gt;&gt; Yeah, thank you for the talk. Uh I'm a PhD student from physics. So I have a question about uh the link to F transform. You mentioned about the uh one counter example for the multiplier B theorem but how is it linked to the K uh this ship uh yeah so could you elaborate a bit on that? Thanks. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. So this is um famous paper on on the disprove uh of B multiply contraction. So um okay let let me just say it's it's hard to summarize a big paper in two minutes but I will try. Um so here when you take the f transform and then you multip so let's now look at where this lips and you multiply by this ball right and the the way to construct such um the way to construct such an f is that you cut you you construct your f like support on those little rectangle that centered at the the the unit sphere and the moment we cut it, it means that you only have what happens inside this spot. So you cut your rectangle by half. And now the how how he construct this example using uh this uh this set. It is like um he extend those rectangles here uh like each um so he extend this triangles here and then we have a lot of disjoint rectangles and this um this disjoint rectangle is where f liv le lives and you take fer transform and then you cut it by half since in free space cutting by half means that in the physical space this uh rectangle will just extend Right? When it extend it falls into the ka set and the in this ka set the basic construction it means that ka set intersect a lot and this means that the function have a lot of overlap here and this is what makes it blow up and that's my two minute disc explanation of ideas. &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you so much. &gt;&gt; It's then Marius then Emanuel Dierre. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much for the talk. I wanted to ask one of your amazing main results is that uh inite three if a set satisfies the cuts tower axum then you can control for that set of tubes the union. Sorry. Um yeah, I was saying that one of your amazing main results is um that in I3 if you have a set of tubes that satisfies the cuts tower aum then for that set of tubes you can control the union. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; I was wondering is it feasible that this might also be true in ar in the sense that &gt;&gt; if you satisfy the cut star axum in four then maybe you can control the union or is it false? It's false. &gt;&gt; It's false. &gt;&gt; Uh but it's it's false for the following example. But uh then you can based on this example to come up with maybe other things. So it's false for the delta neighborhood of this quadrric. So xy - z w = to 1 and and then to fix to to remove this example you need to to replace this rectangular box by semi set of bounded complexity and so this exclude the delta neighborhood of this set. So maybe under this assumption it might be true. It might still be true but it's that some of the proof step will break. &gt;&gt; Um one of the thing I was sensitive to in your lecture is like you really showed us a lot of pictures so that um so that we can follow and also my question is drawing these pictures it's more sociological. my question less technical. Is it extremely important for you to kind of come up with a solution? And second, um, as we have these LLMs that are becoming quite good at proving things, one area of criticism is that they're not very good at visual reasoning. And so my question is has two two facets. One is, is it critical for you to draw lots of pictures like what you've done today? And second, have you had any experience with these LLMs drawing formal things versus um visual reasoning? &gt;&gt; Uh yes, I I have to draw a lot of pictures when when I think. Yeah. So I actually I spend a lot of time drawing pictures myself to help me think. Um and I have I didn't use RM to to do visual reasoning. Actually, I don't I wonder what it means more precisely, but I did try to use it to help me with Tixie and it's it's not doing very well. So, maybe I didn't use the best model, but I drew some picture by hand and and tell could you please draw me a Tixie picture to so that I can put some on my draft. Is anything known about kakaya sets in hyperbolic space? Um so hyperbolic space means &gt;&gt; hyperbolic plane say &gt;&gt; half plane &gt;&gt; means uh if you one replace Rn with hyperbolic space &gt;&gt; and then in this case the ka set will be curved right like the delta neighborhood of geodic something like that &gt;&gt; right here in this cases one shouldn't take So unit line segment but one should take it like the geodic &gt;&gt; all directions &gt;&gt; directions. Um &gt;&gt; you have a segment of length one and you want to put it in all direction say in the hyperbolic plane. &gt;&gt; I I don't know. Yes. I um yeah, I don't have good intuition and but I want to know more about it. &gt;&gt; Any more questions? I had a bit of a question was maybe so philosophical a bit. Um cuz you on Monday during your talk you mentioned that one of the statements you had there was like a continuum version of semidis lema and here the last statement again sort of felt a little bit like a version of semidis lema. So is this &gt;&gt; what &gt;&gt; right? So right like you basically it's of the type you have a set and it's kind of arbitrary and then you can break it into bits that have some structure actually even though we didn't start with anything. &gt;&gt; Uh so is that sort of a constant thing in your in this area of research? for the recent years we we constantly try to do it like um I should also say that this um factoring proposition was inspired by Schumer's idea when he this multiscale de composition to find a structure in the arbitrary set. &gt;&gt; So is there you know is there like a kind of meta semi radius lema that that these things are all special cases &gt;&gt; you mean like semi regularity lema? &gt;&gt; Well yeah yeah um Yeah, like you could say that it's like um identify the structure and then um I mean this is also some sort of there's a it's like this is more like structure and this is like random something like that. um and then you want to um get good estimates. Um I don't know how to say it more precisely, but yeah. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, um maybe let's uh thank Hong Wong again for beautiful field. Yes. So now we have a short 15 minutes break to change over speaker and then we start again at half past 4 with Emanuel Kandes's lecture. I wrote it too late. I thought you are so stupid.
