Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                              № 6/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                How big is my slice of cheese?


                                       Chiara Meroni




       In this snapshot, we introduce the study of slices of
       polytopes – geometric shapes with flat sides – and
       examine the area of these slices. This is connected
       to combinatorics and polynomials and is surprisingly
       complex, even in three dimensions. Since we are
       greedy humans, we conclude by finding the largest
       possible slice of cheese.




                          F i g u r e 1 : Polytope made of Cheddar.

   When I was a kid, my parents would cut the cheese in interesting shapes to
make me eat it: cubes, pyramids, . . . Throughout this snapshot, let’s assume to
be my four-year-old self, believing that cheese naturally comes in these shapes,
which mathematicians call polytopes.


                                             1
1 Polytopal cheese

A polytope is a geometrical object with vertices, edges, and flat faces that has
no dents, holes, or bumps. Figure 1 exhibits an example. Polytopes are a
generalization of the famous “Platonic solids”, whose discovery goes back to
the ancient Greeks.
   A precise mathematical definition relies on the concept of convexity: A set S
in three-dimensional space R3 is convex if for every pair of points x, y belonging
to S, the line segment connecting them is entirely contained in S. Then,
a polytope is the smallest convex set containing a bunch of given points. In
particular, a polytope is the smallest convex set containing its vertices. Formally,
a vertex or corner of a polytope P ⊂ R3 is a point v of P for which there are
planes in space that intersect the polytope only in the point v. This definition
makes sense because every plane that intersects the polytope must either cut
through its interior, contain one of its faces or edges completely, or only touch
a single corner.




   F i g u r e 2 : Polytopal Parmesan in yellow, with vertices marked in black.

   There is another way to define a polytope, which fits better to the cheese
analogy we are exploring: Imagine you have an infinite amount of cheese filling
the whole space. Take a knife and make perfectly straight cuts all the way
through. After each cut, you choose to keep just one of the two sides of the cut.
After some steps, you are going to get a finite piece of cheese, which is actually
a polytope! For instance, with six cuts we can get a piece of Cheddar, as in
Figure 1. With five cuts we can get a piece of Parmesan, as in Figure 2. From a
mathematical perspective, each cut with the knife corresponds to a plane, and
a three-dimensional polytope is the intersection of finitely many half-spaces,
provided that this set has a finite volume.


                                         2
Figure 3 : A green vector (a, b, c), its associated green plane a x + b y + c z = 0
           for d = 0, and the blue half-space a x + b y + c z ≥ 0.


   A plane in R3 can be identified by a vector (a, b, c) in R3 and a real number d,
via the equation
                               ax + by + cz = d
that is satisfied for all points (x, y, z) in the plane. The vector (a, b, c) points in
the direction perpendicular to the cutting plane, while d indicates how far from
the origin the plane is. A half-space is one of the two parts separated by the
plane, namely the set of points (x, y, z) in R3 that satisfy one of the following
affine inequalities:

                    a x + b y + c z ≥ d,         a x + b y + c z ≤ d.

A polytope P is then the set of all points (x, y, z) that satisfy a bunch of affine
inequalities

                              a1 x + b1 y + c1 z ≥ d1 ,
                              a2 x + b2 y + c2 z ≥ d2 ,
                                       ...
                             am x + bm y + cm z ≥ dm

for some vectors (ai , bi , ci ) in R3 and real numbers di . We also require that this
set has a finite volume. We just saw two equivalent definitions of a polytope,
namely its v-description, as a convex hull of its vertices, and its h-description,
as an intersection of half-spaces.

Example (Parmesan cheese). We can use the two definitions to describe
Parmesan cheese. Consider the six points (±1, ±2, 0) and (±1, 0, 5). They are
represented as the black dots in Figure 2 and their convex hull is the yellow


                                             3
polytope. On the other hand, the same object is also cut out by the following
affine inequalities:


                        x ≥ −1,    −x ≥ −1,    z ≥ 0,
                      5y − 2z ≥ −10,   −5y − 2z ≥ −10.


    Now that we know what a polytopal cheese is, we can move on to our
problem: slicing it. We want to cut very very thin, that is, two-dimensional,
slices of our cheese. Formally, a slice of cheese is the intersection of our original
polytopal cheese P with a plane H, which we denote by Q = P ∩ H. Using
the h-description of P , and noticing that a plane is the intersection of the two
(closed) half-spaces it defines, we conclude that Q is also a polytope! However,
Q lives in a plane and therefore it is a two-dimensional polytope, commonly
known as a (convex) polygon.
   A given polytope P may have infinitely many slices, but many of them look
alike, namely they have the same number of vertices and edges. A vertical slice
of Parmesan is going to be a triangle; by moving the vertical plane a little bit,
we will obtain other triangular slices. On the other hand, a horizontal plane
will produce a rectangular slice. Technically, we will say that these different
types of slices have different combinatorial types. You can check that triangles,
quadrilaterals, and pentagons are actually the only possible combinatorial
types of slices of Parmesan cheese, as shown in Figure 4. How many different
combinatorial types of slices does Cheddar have? (See Figure 8 for the answer.)




   Fi g u r e 4 : All the possible combinatorial types of slices of the Parmesan.




                                         4
2 Tr i angles and areas

Not only do we want to slice our cheese, but also to compute how big the slice is.
This translates into the computation of the area of the slices. While some slices
seem nice and regular, such as the rectangular vertical slice of Cheddar, others,
such as the slice on the right side of Figure 4, are not. How can we compute
the area of a polygon? For regular polygons there are well known formulas, but
what if the polygon is not regular at all?
    One of the possible strategies is to reduce the question to the computation
of areas of triangles. In order to do this, we have to subdivide the polygon into
a finite number of triangles; this is known as a triangulation. More precisely, a
triangulation T of a polygon Q is a set of triangles such that
1. every triangle in T is a subset of Q;
2. any two triangles in T have exactly one common edge, one common vertex,
   or do not intersect at all;
3. the union of all triangles in T is the polygon Q.

For instance, in order to construct a triangulation of a polygon Q we can use the
following procedure: We pick a point v inside Q (not on its boundary). Then,
the triangles in our triangulation are exactly those with one edge of Q and the
vertex v. In this way, we obtain a triangulation T with as many triangles as
edges of Q. This is shown on the left side of Figure 5.




             F i g u r e 5 : Two possible triangulations of a polygon.

    However, there are many other possible triangulations of the same polygon Q.
We can add some requirement that we want T to satisfy. A common one is the
following:
        All the vertices of all the triangles in T are also vertices of Q.
Our previous triangulation does not satisfy this property because the additional
point v inside Q is a vertex of every triangle, but not of Q. We can construct


                                        5
another triangulation satisfying the extra condition as follows: For a start, we
enumerate all the vertices of Q counterclockwise and call them v1 , v2 , . . . , vn ,
starting with our favourite vertex v1 . Then, the triangles in T will be those
with vertices v1 , vi , and vi+1 , where i goes from 2 to n − 1. This triangulation
is represented on the right side of Figure 5, where v1 is the lower right vertex.
Now, the triangulation T has two triangles less than the previous one, and all
the vertices of the triangles in T are vertices of Q.
    At this point, we can finally compute the area of our polygon Q. Indeed,
consider any triangulation T of Q. Then, the area of Q is just the sum of the
areas of all the triangles in T . And we know at least one formula to compute
the area of a triangle! For example, we can take half the product of a base
length and the corresponding height.

Example. Suppose that Q is the quadrilateral with vertices

             v1 = (0, 0),        v2 = (2, 2),   v3 = (1, 5),        v4 = (−4, 4),

as shown in Figure 6. Then the area of Q is not very easy to compute at first
sight. However, we can divide Q into two triangles:

                            ∆1         with vertices v1 , v2 , v3 ,
                            ∆2         with vertices v1 , v3 , v4 ,

  Now, any formula for the area of a triangle will tell us that area(∆1 ) = 4
and area(∆2 ) = 12. Therefore,

                                  area(Q) = 4 + 12 = 16.


                                                    y
                                                         v3
                            v4


                                                               v2



                                                    v1              x

             F i g u r e 6 : A possible triangulation of a quadrilateral.




                                                6
3 T h e biggest slice please, I am hungr y!

We learned how to slice some polytopal cheese P and how to measure how big
the slice is. A natural question arises:
                         How can we find the largest slice?
Since there are infinitely many slices, we cannot hope to compute the area
of every single one of them and compare the numbers. The solution is to
parametrize the area of the slices. In other words, we would like to write the
area of the slice Q = P ∩ H as a function of the position of the plane H. Is it
possible? What kind of function is it?
   In order to answer this question, let us use the observation we made earlier:
There are infinitely many slices, but many of them look alike. Indeed, the slice
of the Parmesan cheese in Figure 7 is very similar, though not identical, to the
right-most slice displayed in Figure 4. Both slices are pentagons, but this is not
the only thing that they have in common. The vertices of the two polygons lie
on the same edges of the Parmesan P . Moreover, one can prove that for any
generic plane H, all vertices of Q are precisely the points in which the plane
H defining Q intersects the edges of P . By generic, we mean that H does not
contain vertices of the polytope P . In Figure 7, the green plane H is generic
and intersects exactly five edges of P . Hence, the slice Q is a pentagon.




Figure 7 : Another slice (red) of Parmesan, of the same combinatorial type as
            the one on the right side of Figure 4. The plane that cuts out this
            slice is shown in green.

    Let us put together all the planes that intersect the same edges of P . Consider
k edges of P , which we call e1 , . . . , ek , and define H(e1 , . . . , ek ) as the set of
all planes that intersect these edges. Then, as we already observed, all the
slices Q cut out by generic planes H in H(e1 , . . . , ek ) are going to have exactly
k vertices. If we call vi the vertex of Q that lies on the edge ei of P , we can


                                            7
use the triangulation introduced in section 2 where the triangles have vertices
{v1 , vi , vi+1 }. In this way, with only one choice of triangulation, we managed
to triangulate all the generic slices Q = P ∩ H where H belongs to the set
H(e1 , . . . , ek ). Using this fact, we can then find a formula for the area of every
such slice Q.
   To keep track of a plane H, remember that it can be described by an equation
a x + b y + c z = d with real numbers a, b, c, d. We call Qa,b,c,d the slice of P cut
out by that plane H. Then, one can prove that there is a function f with

           area(Qa,b,c,d ) = f (a, b, c, d)       for all H in H(e1 , . . . , ek ).

Luckily for us, the function f is rational, which means it is the quotient of
two polynomials, and also describes the area of the non-generic slices correctly.
This is very convenient when we want to find its maximum. The proof, which
involves some symbolic determinant computation, is omitted here for simplicity.
    Finding the biggest slice of a polytope P is more challenging from a com-
putational point of view, so we will use the help of computer algebra software.
The idea is as follows: Consider all possible tuples (e1 , . . . , ek ) of edges of P ,
for all k. For each one, compute the set H(e1 , . . . , ek ) and the rational function
f (a, b, c, d). Then, an algorithm can find the maximum of the function f and
hence the maximum of the area of Q, among the slices arising from planes in
H(e1 , . . . , ek ). Now repeat the process for all other tuples of edges. As the
number of tuples is not infinite anymore, you will eventually have a list of slices
that have the maximal area for each type of plane. Choose the largest and you
have the answer!




Figu r e 8 : A slice of Cheddar can be a triangle, quadrilateral, pentagon or
           hexagon. The red slice shown here is the biggest one.




                                              8
4 H i gher-dimensional cheese and beyond

The theory explained in the previous sections is based on discrete geometry,
semialgebraic geometry, and optimization. One of the topics of discrete geometry
is the study of polytopes (even when they do not represent cheese!). For
more details about that we refer to [8] or to other Oberwolfach snapshots like
[2, 3, 4]. Semialgebraic geometry studies sets defined by polynomial equations
and inequalities. These include polytopes, since they are defined by linear
inequalities, which are inequalities involving polynomials of degree one. However,
semialgebraic sets are not limited to polytopes: they can assume many more
shapes, while still having useful properties. Their features make them suitable
for optimization problems and algorithms. This interplay is explained, for
instance, in [1]. The more specific topic of this snapshot is based on the results
in [5] and the code for the algorithm in SageMath is available at [6].
    We have been discussing polytopes in three dimensions and their two-
dimensional slices, but why not consider higher-dimensional cheese? In fact, all
the statements in the previous sections have a counterpart in higher dimensions.
This setting involves a polytope P of dimension d that lives in Rd and planes
are substituted by (d − 1)-dimensional hyperplanes. In this case, like in three
dimensions, we can implement an algorithm that answers the question:

                        What is the biggest slice of P ?

The steps of the algorithm rely on the higher-dimensional version of a triangle,
called a simplex, on higher-dimensional triangulations, and on the symbolic
computation of determinants of some matrices. See [7] for the shape of all slices
of cheddar in dimensions four, five, and six.
    Using the same methods, we can answer similar questions and find the best
slice of a polytope, for other notions of “best”. For instance, what is the slice
with the largest number of vertices? Or what if your parents cut the cheese in
more curvy shapes, like a moon or a ball? What is the best slice of a Mozzarella?
    There are indeed many more generalizations of this problem that wait to be
investigated and better understood.
                                      . . .Yet another Italian talking about food!

Acknowledgements I would like to thank the organizers of the Oberwolfach
workshop 2312, New Directions in Real Algebraic Geometry, for the invitation
to prepare this snapshot.


I m a g e credits

 All figures were created by the author using Mathematica or Inkscape.


                                        9
R e ferences

[1] S. Basu, R. Pollack, and M. F. Roy, Algorithms in real algebraic geometry,
    second ed., Algorithms and Computation in Mathematics, vol. 10, Springer,
    2006.
[2] S. Böhm, The Five Platonic Solids and their Connection to Root Systems,
    Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach (2025), no. 4, https:
    //doi.org/10.14760/SNAP-2025-004-EN.
[3] J. Hofscheier and A. Kasprzyk, Is there a Smooth Lattice Polytope which
    does not have the Integer Decomposition Property?, Snapshots of modern
    mathematics from Oberwolfach (2025), no. 8, https://doi.org/10.14760/
    SNAP-2025-008-EN.

[4] M. Joswig, Convex Polytopes and Linear Programs, Snapshots of modern
    mathematics from Oberwolfach (2025), no. 2, https://doi.org/10.14760/
    SNAP-2025-002-EN.
[5] M.-C. Brandenburg, J. A. De Loera, and C. Meroni, The best ways to slice
    a polytope, Mathematics of Computation 94 (2025), 1003–1042.

[6]         , MathRepo: Mathematical Research-Data Repository, 2025, https:
      //mathrepo.mis.mpg.de/BestSlicePolytopes.
[7] M.-C. Brandenburg and C. Meroni, Combinatorics of slices of cubes,
    arXiv:2510.09265, 2025.

[8] G. M. Ziegler, Lectures on polytopes, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol.
    152, Springer, 1995.




                                     10
Chiara M e r o n i i s a Ju n i or Fellow at ETH    Connection s t o o t he r f i e l d s
Institute f o r T h e o r e t i c a l Studies.      Computer S c i e n c e

Mathem a t i c a l s u b j e c t s                  License
Discrete M a t h e m a t i c s a nd Foundations,    Creative Co m m o n s B Y- SA 4 . 0
Geometr y a n d To p o l o g y
                                                    DOI
                                                    10.14760/S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 6 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junior E d i t o r s                                Mathematis c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Mar tin G ü n t h e r a n d R a phael Appenzeller   Oberwolfac h g G m b H
junior- e d i t o r s @ m f o. d e                  Schwarzwa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                    77709 Obe r wo l f a c h
Senior E d i t o r                                  Ger many
Anja Ra n d e cke r
senior- e d i t o r @ m f o. d e                    Director
                                                    Gerhard Hu i s ke n
