[Music] Welcome to another Mathologer video. 
Today we'll do the impossible. We'll build   the 4D counterpart of the Rubik's Cube out of 
plastic right here in our physical 3D world.   We'll scramble it and we'll solve it with our 
3D hands. We'll also confront a few classic   Rubik's Cube conundrums proven to be impossible 
in three dimensions, but solvable in four. and   then strangely enough also in three. Lots to look 
forward to. Before tackling the 4D Rubik's cube,   let me start by reminding you what a 4D cube 
is mathematically. Not a 4D Rubik's cube,   but just a 4D cube. The best way to approach this 
elusive object is via the cubes in dimensions 1,   2, and three. Okay. In what sense is a square a 2D 
cube and an interval a 1D cube? Well, in the sense   that they can be built in exactly the same way 
as a 3D cube. To see this, let's add coordinates.   Then, as you can see, the vertices of these cubes 
are exactly those points in 1D, 2D, and 3D that   are all ones and minus ones. Okay. So, what 
about 4D? Well, obviously, the vertices of the   4D counterpart should be the 4D points with these 
X, Y, Z, and W plus -1 coordinates. Next, we flesh   out a full cube, edges, faces, and sides, also 
all in terms of coordinates. And once we're done   with that, it's possible to virtually manipulate 
a 4D cube as easily as a 3D cube. For example,   it's very easy to code this iconic 4D shadow 
play animation. You've probably seen something   like that before, right? Okay. Sounds tricky, but 
really not a big deal. Having said that, for our   purposes, all this mucking around with coordinates 
is a bit of overkill as it's actually very easy to   develop all the intuition we need by playing the 
popular primary school game of 1, two, three. What   comes next? Let me show you. Let's try to guess 
how many sides a 4D cube has and what these sides   look like. Okay, a 3D cube has six square sides. 
In other words, a 3D cube has six 2D cube sides,   right? A square is just a 2D cube. Next, a 2D cube 
has four 1D cube sides. And a 1D cube has two zer   cube sides. A zero d cube is just a point. And so 
2 4 6. What comes next? 2 4 6 eight. Of course.   Eight of what? Eight 3D cube sides. Of course. 
Great. Now, how about this? In a normal cube,   there are three sides meeting in a vertex. In a 
2D cube, there are two sides meeting in a vertex   and one. One, two, three. What comes next? 1 
2 3 four. Of course. What does all this tell   us about a 4D Rubik's cube? Well, in 3D we've got 
six sides and therefore also six colors. And so in   4D there should be eight sides and eight colors, 
right? Also, anything that's a square in a Rubik's   cube should be a 3D cube in 4D. For example, all 
sides and stickers of a 4D Rubik's cube should   be 3D cubes. There on the right, that's the red 
cubicle side of the 4D Rubik's cube consisting   of a bunch of cubicle stickers. Pretty weird, but 
also makes sense, right? What about the three and   the four at the bottom? Well, a normal Rubik's 
cube has three square stickers per QB. And so,   we expect every single one of the cubies of a 4D 
Rubik's cube to have four cubicle stickers. All   clear? No, not at all. Don't worry. These 
4D acrobatics take a bit to get used to,   but by the end of this video, you'll be an 
expert. For the moment, just go with the flow. Looking at lower dimensions is great for 
building intuition for higher dimensions. Now,   today's mission is to build a 4D Rubik's 
cube in 3D. a physical 4D Rubik's cube   that you can actually hold in your hands and 
twist right here in the 3D world we live in.   Very important. I'm talking about a physical 
object, not just a virtual simulator. And so,   let's start by warming up with the same task 
one dimension down. Let's start by building that   normal 3D Rubik's cube over there in 2D. Hm. 3D 
in 2D. That still sounds impossible, doesn't it?   Well, the important insight here is that a normal 
Rubik's cube is not that 3D a puzzle. It's really   a 2D puzzle wrapped around a 3D shape, right? The 
real Rubik's cube is really all about those 2D   stickers, how they get shuffled around and in this 
sense is a flat 2D puzzle. And so what we'll do is   to simply unfold this 2D puzzle and make it flat 
there. Split it into its front and back layers and   flatten out both layers. Tada. We just rebuilt our 
real Rubik's cube in 2D. Its cubies are trefoils   consisting of three square stickers each just 
like in the real deal. Also, as in the real deal,   there are eight of these trefoil cubies. What are 
the six sides of the Rubik's cube? Well, here's   side number one, two, three, four, five, six. Now, 
let's just reorient our cube in space like this.   This reorientation translates into this shuffle 
of the flat Rubik's cube. Okay. Right. The front   layer of our 3D cube is now exactly what you see 
on the left and the back layer is what you see on   the right. Turn again. This way of shuffling the 
flat cube is called a gyro rotation or simply a   gyro. Here's a different sort of rotation of the 
3D 2x2x2, a front rotation. In the flat cube,   this corresponds to simultaneous rotations 
of the left and right sides again. Again,   now gyro. Okay, so far we've really just rotated 
the 2x2x2 in space. Now, let's twist the front   layer. That's just the quarter rotation of the 
left half of the flat cube. Now very important   we can completely shuffle and solve the 2x2x2 
by restricting ourselves to rotating the cube   in space and twisting the front layer as we 
just did. Right? A twist of any layer can also   be achieved by first rotating the layer to the 
front and then twisting the front. For example,   to twist the right layer, we can first rotate 
it to the front and then twist the front. There you can restrict yourself to twisting the 
front to scramble and solve. What this means is   that our flat cube at the bottom together with 
gyros and those simultaneous rotations to reorient   as well as rotations of the left side to twist the 
front face is a minimalistic yet fully functional   2D version of the 3D Rubik's cube. Just three 
moves. Fantastic. Mission accomplished. Of course,   for a richer cubing experience, we may 
want to figure out what those twists of the   other faces correspond to in the flat cube. For 
example, let's figure out what twisting the top   translates to. Here we go. Aha, that's just a gyro 
restricted to the top part of our flat puzzle. So,   if you want, you can also add this half gyro to 
your repertoire of flat Rubik's cube moves. Well,   all this is supposed to be a warm-up for our real 
mission to build a 3D model of a 4D Rubik's cube,   an object which we as 3D people cannot see and 
touch directly. And so, let's make our warm-up a   little bit more realistic by looking at all this 
from the point of view of a 2D person who cannot   see the 3D cube. So, say you are this 2D person 
who's been given the minimalistic flat cube on   the left to play with and explore. How would you 
figure out what twisting the top face currently   occupied by the green stickers looks like? Well, 
easy. You first reorient the flat cube so that the   green stickers become the front face. Then perform 
a twist of the front face. And then finish off by   undoing the reorientation we started with. Here we 
go. First move the green stickers. Okay. Twist the   front. Now rotate the greens back to the top. 
And of course that's exactly the same as what   we got by performing that half gyro. In this way 
we can figure out completely within the 2D world   what those other twists correspond to and we can 
add the half gyro and those other twisty moves to   our repertoire. And so we're now ready to tackle 
the 4D Rubik's Cube. [Music] Okay, what's the 3D   analog of our flat cube? That's what we're after, 
right? Easy. Our flat cube is made up of these TFO   cubies consisting of three square stickers each. 
The corresponding 3D counterpart looks like this.   Four cubicle stickers combined into a cubie. And 
then this is what the complete unfolded 4D 2x2x2x2   looks like. It's a hedgehog. Also remember the 4D 
Rubik's cube has eight cubicle sides of different   colors made up of cubical stickers. Here's side 
number one. The red cubicle side made up of eight   red cubicle stickers. That's the orange side 
opposite the red. Here's the white side. Well,   looks gray, but it's supposed to be white. Here's 
the yellow side opposite the white. The green   side. And opposite that green side, the blue side. 
That's six sides so far, but there are two more.   There's also the pink side. And opposite that, 
the purple side. Just looking out there in the   back. Very pretty. And important to keep in mind, 
the 3D model at the bottom arises from the real 4D   Rubik's cube in exactly the same way as the flat 
model at the top arises from the normal 2x2x2.   In particular, the left and right sides of our 
model correspond to two opposite layers of the 4D   Rubik's cube. Okay, what about reorienting things 
at the bottom? Rotating the 4D Rubik's cube. Well,   what's the counterpart of the gyro? What did that 
look like again at the top? Well, let me show you   again, but this time pay particular attention 
to the sides in the middle. Yellow, red, white,   and orange. A gyro cycles these sides to the left 
and leaves the top and bottom sides, the green and   the blue in place. Ready? Watch. Okay. Now, at the 
bottom, exactly the same. The gyro cycles the four   sides along the middle axis to the left and leaves 
the outside sides pink, purple, green, and blue in   place. Watch as, for example, the orange stickers 
move left. This animation took ages to do. Now,   as earlier, the other non-jyro ways of reorienting 
the 4D Rubik's cube are realized by simultaneous   opposing rotations of the two sides of our 3D 
model. However, instead of just one such rotation   in the 2D model, there are three different ones 
in the 3D model. Here's the first. Here's the   second and the third. So, four different ways to 
reorient the 4D Rubik's cube. these three and the   gyro. Now, what about twists say of the left 
side? That's one layer of the 4D Rubik's cube,   right? Easy. Those are just these 3D rotations of 
the layer on the left. Okay, here's an interesting   insight. When I keep twisting a layer in a normal 
Rubik's cube, I get back to the beginning after   doing so four times. 1 2 3 four. Right? In other 
words, there are four different ways to align   opposite layers using combinations of the three 
different twists over there. In how many different   ways can we align the two layers over there? Well, 
let's count. With the pink stickers in front,   there are four ways of aligning. We're looking at 
one, then two, three, four, but then we can twist   any of the six outside colors on the left to the 
front and we will get four alignments for each   color. And so that gives a total number of 6 * 4 
equals 24 alignments of the two layers. In other   words, they're not just those three twists over 
there. They're really 24 ways to twist a layer   in a 4D Rubik's cube. And that includes the do 
nothing twist. That's quite a bit up from four   in the case of a 3D Rubik's cube. In practice, 
this means that to twist one of those two layers   over there, just pick it up, spin it around in 
space, any way you like, and then put it back next   to the other layer. Okay? And so this hedgehog 
together with the different reorientation moves,   and all these twists of the left layer mount to 
a minimalistic, fully functioning 4D Rubik's cube   right here in our 3D world. Fantastic. Again, 
I actually built myself a real life model using   plastic magnet cubes and 3D printed connectors. 
Looks professional, doesn't it? Well, how easy is   it to actually manipulate this thing? Ready for 
a bit of a laugh? Here's me performing the gyro. Okay, definitely a gyro, but maybe it's still 
a tiny little bit too clunky, isn't it? Well,   don't worry. Eventually, we'll refine this 
prototype into a speed cube that looks like   this. This thing handles like a Ferrari. But 
before we build and test drive the Ferrari,   let's first extend our minimalistic 
move set by a couple of slick moves   and come up with a super intuitive 
way of solving the 4D Rubik's Cube. Remember our flat cube and how without direct 
access to the 3D Rubik's Cube, we figured out   how twists of sides other than the two right in 
front of us can be executed within the flat cube.   No? Well, then here's a quick reminder using an 
example just in case. Let's figure out what the   twist of the side currently occupied by the orange 
stickers looks like. For that, just reorient the   flat cube so that the orange stickers occupy the 
front face. Remember now, twist the front and   finally reorient the orange stickers back to the 
middle. Okay, so we all remember now, right? And   then on closer inspection, what's happened here is 
the whole center part of our flat cube got rotated   like this. Okay. Now we can do the same with 
our 3D model of the 4D Rubik's cube. I'll skip   the details and just show you two particularly 
natural and useful moves that correspond to twists   of other sides that emerge from a detailed 
analysis. Move number one is the 180° twist.   So the 180° twist just swaps the two tops. Now 
the second very natural move that we discover   is the axial twist that rotates the middle part 
of our cube. Okay, here's the axial twist one   more time. With this axial twist, we are heading 
towards a major aha moment. To get ready for this,   let's reorient our cube such that the cores 
of the two sides are purple and pink. Just a   rotational gyro gets us there. There in 
this reorientation of our Rubik's cube,   the stickers with the original six Rubik's 
cube colors are on the outside and the pink   and purple stickers occupy the cores. Now 
just step back for a moment and have a close   look at the left side. Does this remind 
you of something? Should be obvious. Can   you see it? No. Yes. Doesn't this look 
very much like a real 2x2x2? Actually,   if we don't worry about the cores of the two sides 
of our physical folio Rubik's cube for the moment,   what we're looking at here are two 2x2x2s. One 
the mirror image of the other. Now, what's really,   really, really great is that you can scramble and 
solve one of these 2x2x2s using aial twists. You   see, an axial twist just gives the left 2x2 x2 a 
twist. But then to actually completely scramble   this 2x2 x two, we just repeatedly reorient it 
in space and perform axial twists. Can you see   how? No. Should sound familiar. We already did 
something like this earlier. Anyway, have a look. So again, what I'm doing here is 
perform two types of twists of the   4D Rubik's cube. I reorient the cube on 
the left. That's just twisting the left   layer of our 4D Rubik's cube. And then I also 
perform this other special twist, the axial twist. Now the left is nicely scrambled. But did 
you notice something else? Have a look   at the right side. On the right side, not 
much has changed as we've just twisted one   layer back and forth. That layer there. Let's 
call this special layer the buffer layer. Okay.   Can you see where I'm going with this? Not yet. 
Well, then imagine those two cubes in front of   you are completely scrambled. They are completely 
scrambled. Also, let's say you know how to solve   a real 2x2 x2. Okay? Then you can solve the left 
cube completely using axel twists. At this point,   the right cube is still a mess. Now, switch 
from fiddling with the cube on the left   to solving the right cube. Once you're 
done, both cubes are essentially solved,   except that one buffer layer on the left may 
be twisted a bit. Maybe like this. Anyway,   takeaway message at this point. If you can solve 
a normal Rubik's cube, this will take you a long   way towards being able to solve our physical 4D 
Rubik's cube. In the next section, I'll show how   to combine everything we found so far into a 
general solution of our physical 4D Rubik's   cube. But before I do this, here's a shortcut that 
I use when I actually manipulate my plastic model.   As you can see from me performing the gyro 
simultaneously manipulating both sides of the   puzzle is quite a challenge. However, the whole 
buffer business suggests the following trick. Say   I want to manipulate the left side using a fancy 
2x2 x2 algorithm. What I do is simply execute   the algorithm on the left and ignore actually 
spinning the buffer layer on the right to start   with. However, to keep track of the back and forth 
movement of the buffer, I keep a running count of   twists. Starting in zero, a clockwise twist adds 
one, and an anticlockwise twist adds minus one,   corresponding to the buffer's rotation direction. 
Whenever the count reaches four, 1 2 3 4, meaning   the buffer has completed a full revolution, the 
count resets to zero. Only after I've finished   the algorithm do I transfer the required twist 
to the buffer on the right. Here's a quick demo. I really need stronger magnets. Okay, so real 
Rubik's cubes it is. Let me demonstrate this   counting business while fixing up the top 
layer of the cube on the left. All right,   the count is zero to start with. 
So we want to do a twist like this. That's a minus one. And so the 
count is minus one. Now, - 2,   -3, -4, that's a zero. And this is a 
positive twist. So, plus one. And so,   the count is + one. You can transfer this + 
one over to the buffer by going like this.   But actually in this case we don't really have 
to transfer anything because there's room to do   some nothing move on the left which is this minus 
one here. This minus one also cancels out the one   and so the count would also be zero here and 
we're okay again. Very cool, don't you think? Okay, here's a completely scrambled 4D Rubik's 
cube. We want to solve it so that in the end it   looks like this. In particular, we want the pink 
and purple stickers to occupy the cores on the   left and right. Any other pair of opposite colors 
in the course would also be okay, but let's go for   pink and purple. Before we start solving, let 
me point out that every QB has either a purple   or a pink sticker, right? Completely obvious 
in this solved state. Look at any of the QBs.   One of its stickers is a core sticker and 
as such pink or purple. Since both sides   are made up of eight cubes each, this means 
that at all times there are eight purple or   pink stickers on each side and that there are 
16 purple and pink stickers altogether. Next,   let me highlight 16 special positions. Those 
ones here. What's special about these positions?   Well, remember if you execute a gyro, all the 
stickers on the middle axis cycle left. Well,   half of that middle axis is the special positions. 
The other half is the cause. And what a gyro does   is to swap what's in the course with what's in 
the special positions. All clear? A gyro swaps   what's in the cores with what's in the special 
positions. Great. Okay. Then the first step in   solving our puzzle is to use normal Rubik's 
cube moves to fill all the special positions   with stickers that are not purple or pink. Easy 
peasy. Promise. There. No purple or pink. Then   we make a gyro. And this swaps these non-purp 
pink stickers into the course. In other words,   we can now be sure that all 16 purple and pink 
stickers are on the outsides. Then we use normal   Rubik's cube moves to put all the 16 purple and 
pink stickers in the 16 special positions. Again,   easy peasy. Another gyro. And the purple and pink 
stickers now fill the cores. Fantastic. Definitely   making progress. Now important. The cores on 
the left and right are like mini 2x2x twos. And   as long as we don't worry about what happens to 
the outside stickers, we can manipulate the cores   with normal Rubik's cube moves. and those fancy 
180 degree twists in exactly the same way as we   would manipulate the outsides counting and all. In 
fact, it's a piece of cake to separate the purple   and pink stickers in this way. Here's a bit of a 
demo in which I focus on manipulating the course.   Okay, count is zero, one, two, some or nothing 
moves. Three, four, count is zero. Okay, other   side. I want to swap those two cubes there. Cubal 
stickers. I do this with a Rubik's cube algorithm   that has a count of minus one. Compensate by 
one, overall count zero. Put them together.   do one of those 180° twists and done. The only 
thing left to do is to solve the outsides again   with normal Rubik's cube moves. And that's it. 
So there are four stages to the general solve.   Move all the purple and pink stickers to the 
outsides. From there, move them to the course,   then separate the purples and pinks, and finally 
solve the outsides. All not terribly hard. And   basically if you can solve a normal Rubik's cube, 
you're also 90% there as far as its 4D counterpart   is concerned. All good except that there are a few 
intriguing problems that you may have to overcome   along the way. First problem, remember how I 
told you to solve the outsides with Rubik's cube   moves. Again, first completely solve one 2x2 x2, 
then solve the other. Once you're done with both   2x2x2s and your count is zero, you're really done. 
However, what can also happen is that your count   is two. In other words, at this stage, you would 
have to transfer a half turn to the other solved   side. And something like this is what you really 
end up with, an extra half turn. Bummer. On closer   inspection, it's possible to overcome this problem 
using one of the standard Rubik's Cube algorithms   that exchanges adjacent tubies. By applying this 
algorithm four times to the QBs on the top right   as indicated over there cancels out the extra half 
turn. Also this combo algorithm happens to have a   count of zero and so by the end of it the outsides 
are really completely solved. I just remarked that   you cannot end with a odd count. If you do 
you messed up somewhere. Okay. Problem number   two. You can end up with a twisted corner. As any 
Rubik's cube enthusiast will tell you this is not   possible. in any real Rubik's cube. However, it 
turns out that corner twists like this never occur   in isolation. They always come in pairs. This sort 
of problem can be solved by using a 180° twist to   move both twisted cubes into the same half and 
then resolving these two twists in the usual 2x2   base. This usual way happens to have a count of 
zero. Final problem, the mysterious mono flip.   This kind of strange and very interesting flip of 
just one QB in isolation is possible. The monoflip   exchanges the positions of two pairs of stickers 
as I've indicated up there. Takes a bit of   soulsearching to sort this one out, but in the end 
you realize that this is just another incarnation   of problem two where the two QB twists end up 
superimposed like this. Right? Performing those   two indicated twists also produces a monoflip. 
You might run into these issues partway through   a solve, not just at the very end, but there's 
nothing a bit of common sense can't handle. [Music] Okay, this amazing physical 4D Rubik's 
cube was invented by Melinda Green 8 years ago,   and you can purchase a super fun do-it-yourself 
kit or a fully assembled puzzle from Melinda.   Details in the description of this video. This 
piece of higherdimensional art is powered by a   staggering 384 neodymium magnets and is an 
absolute must have for any serious twisty   puzzle enthusiast. Fun fact, Melinda told me 
that the idea of using magnets had been there   from the start, but after exhausting all other 
options, it was an early Mathologer video about   magnet-based Rubik's cubes and polarity chasing 
that finally showed her how to make it work. Okay,   but what exactly is the relationship between 
Melinda's puzzle and the hedgehog? Well,   let's see. In the hedgehog, a QB consists of four 
cubes colored differently. In Melinda's cube,   the corresponding QB is a single four 
colored cube. Four colored how? Well,   this is how. Inscribe a tetrahedrron into a 
cube. Paint its four sides and then paint the   corners of the cube sitting above these 
sides with the same colors. Obviously,   a QB like this is a lot more compact than 
our calro looking QB at the top. To motivate   compacting the top into the bottom, let's first 
do this one dimension down. What do you think   of this way of compacting the flat cube? 
Can't decide? Well, let's see it in action. All right. Very nice, don't you think? Let's have a closer 
look at how this compacting is done. Okay,   first we highlight these triangular corners of 
the Tfold QB. Then we simply slide them together. Now the whole thing. Okay, let's do the same one dimension up. 
Highlight the corners and slide them together.   That's already quite compact, but we can do 
better. For this, remove the purple corner and   fold the remaining corners together like this. 
Finish by reinserting the purple corner. Now,   let's apply this transformation to the whole 
hedgehog. Isolate the corners. Slide them   together. Remove the purple and pink core stickers 
for the moment. Fold things together and reattach   the purple and pink stickers on the outside. Not 
bad, huh? Now, the hedgehog on top is really just   an unfolded 4D Rubik's cube, and as such, it is 
closer to the real deal than Melinda's puzzle.   However, Melinda's puzzle is much more playable. 
As a physical puzzle, Melinda's cube behaves   almost the same as the hedgehog. However, there 
are some important differences. In particular,   the core stickers in the hedgehog end 
up on the outside of Melinda's cube.   This is actually great for visibility. However, 
also slightly complicates moves that transport   stickers between the cores and the outsides 
of the hedgehog. For example, the gyro is   no longer a simple cycle left action because on 
top of the cycling action, the gyro in Melinda's   cube also needs to incorporate some inside out 
magic. People use a couple of different ways to   execute this gyro. There is no default natural 
one. Here's Melinda's original clamshell gyro.   This is also the one that I use. So, Melinda's 
gyro starts with this short stacking move. Then   there's the long stacking move. And finally, 
three of these very nifty clamshell moves. All right, here's the before and after. Note 
that on top of the differences that I already   mentioned, this gyro also moves stickers 
a bit differently from the one we used for   the hedgehog. If you eventually end up using 
it, you'll need to make a small adjustment   to the solving method I described earlier. 
Anyway, here are a few basic twists. Okay,   spin the left side. That's just a twist of the 
4D Rubik's cube. Another twist. Another. Now,   one of those fancy 180° twists. Let's see. Here we 
go. Okay, another one. And here's an axial twist. Okay, let's just do a couple more. Two. Three. 
Four. Back to the beginning. Some people also   execute the execute twist like this. Avoids that 
fancy finger acrobatics to immobilize the far left   and right of the puzzle. All right, let me just 
mention that Melinda's puzzles have stealthily   infiltrated every corner of the globe. Well 
over 1,000 are out there in the wild. In fact,   I've captured six myself. There's even a 
hall of fame on Melinda's website honoring   the roughly 100 officially confirmed 
songs. Melinda's challenge to you,   earn your exclusive spot in that hall of fame. My 
challenge to all of you coding wizards, create a   fully animated online simulator of the hedgehog. 
The prize for the best submission that ticks all   the boxes will be one of Melinda's puzzles and 
I'll announce the winner in the next video. Okay, so you think this was all too easy. Well 
then, 2x two by 2x two. What comes next? Well,   what about this monster? The physical 3x3x3x3. 
Well, maybe not. Well, there is a virtual version   that you should check out for an unforgettable 
experience. W totally insane. Actually,   if you're interested in solving the 3x3x3x3 and 
lots of other higher dimensional twisty puzzles,   check out the amazing classic app Magic Cube 4D, 
also by Melinda and friends. That's the 3x3x3x3   being solved in this app. actually surprisingly 
doable, mainly due to the built-in macro feature   that allows you to program your own algorithms and 
use them in solving the puzzle. Our 2x2x 2x two   looks like this in Magic Cube 4D. The hedgehog 
and its Magic Cube 4D counterpart are closely   related. Have a look. One half of the hedgehog 
is this inner part and the rest is the outside   of the other half. The core of the other half 
is not visible in Magic Cube 4D. Magic Cube 4D   features over 100 different fourdimensional 
twisty puzzles. Here just a few examples. I already did a video on solving the 3x3x3x3 
in Magic Cube 4D early on in the history of   Mathologer. Definitely also check out that 
video. But that's just the tip of the iceberg   as far as simulators are concerned. Guess 
what Magic Cube 5D and Magic Cube 7D do. That's enough for today. I'll finish with a big 
big thank you to Melinda for all her help with   this video. There's plenty more in the description 
if you'd like to explore further. And at the   very end of this video, I've included a little 
gallery of the nicest visuals that didn't make   the main cut. So stick around for that. All 
right, that's it for now. See you next time.