So Steve, I don't know if you remember, Marian and I came to um your office. I think it was either in tw I think it was 2019. We talked to you about the fickle heart program that had been at the Isaac Newton Institute and about this idea of digital twins. Um we were going to ask you, can you start off just by giving us a general idea of what do we mean by a digital twin? So in our context and I appreciate that there are many contexts uh we would say that a digital twin is a computational model or incilico representation of a particular asset or entity and in this case we're thinking about the heart or the cardiovascular system uh that is based on a specific individual and that is going to be updated with information through time from sensors or repeat measurements and that that will then inform form decisions that add value I believe is the the formal definition and in our context that might be uh giving you better diagnostics to say to explain is the heart stiffer is it activating well is it pumping blood well it might be making forecasts to say we think that your heart's going to be improving or getting worse with your disease it might be whatif testing so that you can say I want to give drug A or drug B and then we'll be able to predict which of So what what the outcome will be and then that can be used to inform uh therapy selection or patient selection for a trial. Uh or it might be provide an additional insight so that we have a patient we can see that uh we can do some tests to find out what are the main proteins or main factors which are determining their disease progression and that could then go on to inform a device therapy or a new diagnostic. when we spoke to you then it was I think it was very much still on the theoretical sort of um basis but you were going from then to do initial studies in sort of hospital or clinical settings. Um what what's happened since then? Have you where where are we at with digital twins of people's hearts? >> Yep. So we've got to a point with digital twins that they've been used in kind of early kind of uh clinical studies I would say where they have been demon the feasibility has been demonstrated particularly in areas like ventricular tacardas and uh atrial fibrillation have been demonstrated at Johns Hopkins and we have looked at how we can guide uh heart failure therapies uh that we did at St. Thomas' hospital. Uh those have been very much models of an individual patient to inform a specific decision. Uh we've also more recently been awarded a EPSRC uh program grant and that's uh CBDNET and in that grant we're working with uh patients who are pulmonary arterial hypertension patients and they have implanted sensors and that then gives us these kind of continuous measurements that we can use to update our mathematical models of the patients and then make continuous forecasts. And so that's what we're working on now. And there's a number of parts that have to come together from both the mathematics side of it, but also from the data governance side of it and also from the patient engagement and understanding patients awareness, their understanding of a digital twin, understanding how we can kind of communicate digital twin results to those individuals. >> So it's interesting. So you've done these initial studies for specific diseases and now you've got this big program um where you're actually going to where you've got models of particular patients their hearts are being updated with um with data through this this monitoring Richard. So what what's your involvement with the sort of digital twin stuff? >> So so my my invol I guess in some sense I'm Steve's pet statistician. I've been working with Steve for a decade now. Um, and so, you know, I I I'm not I've learned a little bit about hearts, but it's not my expertise. So, my my end of thing is definitely the uncertainty quantification end of things. Uh, and so it's helping Steve tackle the challenges they have in that cardiac setting. >> Is that a setting you've worked in before or? >> No, it's not actually. So, I've not done anything medical before. So uh my background was doing uh research uh well uncertain modifications so parameter estimation in complex models and the application are I'd worked in before were like climate science, geoscience, paleontology and genetics. Um so kind of a diverse range of fields but never medicine before but mathematically the ideas are the same and the techniques are the same just a new setting for me. Are they always similar models or are they >> they um they have some similarities. So um the similarity between what we're doing say with hearts and with climate is they are big expensive deterministic uh models that are based on partial differential equations. So in that sense they're they're quite similar in how they behave and the kind of methods that going to work. What do you hope would be the benefit of having something like the digital heart? What would the impact be either on advances in medicine more generally or in individual treatment of patients? >> So there's multiple potential benefits. Uh you know the most ambitious in some sense is to guide treatment. Um so we can collect data from patients uh very intensively by you know uh inserting cathodes inside their heart and measuring electrical activity or pressures. Um but we can only do that for short periods of time. So hopefully what the twins will allow us to do little twins is to be able to infer what's happening even when they're not in the hospital. And if we have that information then we can start to ask what if questions or if the surgeon does this uh or if we give them this medicine uh what will the effect be on them but there's also a monitoring aspect um so the big new project that Steve's leading that I'm involved in is looking at pulmonary hypertension patients and this is a a group of very thick patients um and there's only five centers around the UK that treat these patients. And the way the NHS typically works is that you have an appointment set up every six months uh and they travel in and sometimes they they didn't need to travel in or sometimes maybe they needed to go in uh but the appointments sometime in the future. So hopefully we can use these twins that are tracking their state the state of their illness, their current health and use that information to say, "Okay, we don't need to see you this month. Come in three months instead." Or to be able to throw them and say, "I I think you need to come in. We need to speak to you uh and you know, see what's going on and maybe change your treatment because what we're doing at the moment isn't working." So I think there are two main uses. >> Yeah. In that second example, would that be getting would those digital twins I mean that's such an interesting idea. Would those digital twins of their hearts be getting updated data from the patient remotely or something? Is that the idea? >> That is the idea. Yeah. So in this new new project, part of the project is implanting pressure sensors directly in to the pulmonary artery. So we'll have not quite real time but at least daily measures of what is happening in terms of the pressure buildup in the heart which is the key kind of uh symptom in pulmonary hypertension. Obviously that is a thing that we can only afford to do for a small number of patients. And so part of the project is trying to first of all what can we say when we do have that data but then link that data to more easily collectible things perhaps from smart watches or or other wearable devices. And if we can make that link between this kind of messier, noisier data to the more precise data and then link that precise data to outcomes, then we might have a useful tool that would work at scale for the entire population of patients. >> What were the impacts you got from that initial fickle heart program at the INI? I mean so for us the fickle heart program was I mean I I was was great at INI because it brought together a bunch of people who were not necessarily uh in the healthcare space. So we had people who attended the meeting who came from the nonlinear dynamics space and from infrastructure space and they were able to come and say you know share some of the lessons that they had learned from things like wind farms. So in wind farms, you might have a mechanical failure in one of your turbines, and you don't want to have a lot of these, and you don't expect to have a lot of these, but when you do have one, you want to learn from that failure and apply it to all the other wind turbines in your farm. And that same idea, you can see how you can use that in patients. So we have a patient and they might have an adverse event under a stress condition or to a therapy or for whatever as the disease progresses. And then we want to share that information from that person with all the other patients who represent with with similar kind of backgrounds. And so how can we can kind of optimize that learning between the different uh individuals where we have digital twins of them. >> So for me that was a great opportunity to kind of bring in people from different areas into the project. It's so interesting the idea that because I mean ethically I can see why you'd want to share that um learning from one patient or one um problem with a wind turbine across everything but that you sort of mathematically have to understand how to deal with that information as well and I was interested as well how did that program impact what's happened since and maybe the RCL program is there any interplay between those >> yeah absolutely so um when we wrote the RCL program um proposal uh because we have to submit an outline proposal what we're going to do. I think it was very influenced by my experience with um Steve on what problems matter you know mathematicians will always find interesting things to work on and statisticians will always find interesting technical problems and it's the challenge for me at least is making sure those problems are relevant to the real world in some way you know what's going to matter to some end user and so I think that Uh the fickle heart program really opened my eyes and you know lots of other uh mathematicians who came to what are the challenges in the this setting where we have very big expensive models very sparse possibly noisy data and very hard kind of decision problems. you know what how does statistics need to develop to be useful uh in that setting and I think more directly from the fickle heart program one of the big outcomes was Steve's program grant um so that's almost 10 million pounds over five years to develop exemplar digital twins for this pulmonary hypertention patient group and I think everyone who is part of that program was at the uh fickle heart um workshop here at the INI. So I think the the seeds of it started there even if Steve had been thinking about it for longer than that. >> Well that's really interesting. So the RCL program is about uh representing calibrating and leveraging uncertainty. So how does how does that relate then to these models of digital twins in particular of the heart that that you've been working on with Steve? >> Yeah. So um to take those three kind of key strands in turn. Uh so representing uncertainty statistics statisticians are typically very good at representing uncertainty when it's about a number a continuous number. So what's the temperature going to be in Cambridge tomorrow? We know how to model uncertainty and evaluate it and so on. It becomes harder when the objects we're talking about live in a more complex space. So for example, if you're predicting the shape of proteins um or in our case we're predicting processes that are to do with the heart and the heart has a shape. So for example uh arrhythmias are to do with electrical waves spreading on the surface of the heart. So our data live on this two-dimensional non-ucuklidian so non kind of uniform um surface and thus we you know we need to develop new mathematics to figure out how to represent uncertainties in those more complex spaces. And what um are you drawing on work already already done in other fields to do those representations? What sort of what sort of ideas are you using for that? So um you know there's there's the pure mathematicians have done lot lots of work uh in various fields on uh you know non-ucuklidian spaces and so absolutely we're trying to borrow um the theory that exists in that more abstract space and see if we can extend the the kind of methods we have um which are Gaussian processes or sometimes called kernel methods to work when the the base space we're working with is one of those more complex objects. So absolutely there's a a whole branch of mathematics that deals with these things and it's kind of joining that together with machine learning uh to make progress. So we're not reinventing hard abstract mathematics here. We're we're borrowing from those fields. So one aspect of the program is this idea of how you represent uncertainty when the thing you're dealing with is is a complex object and and there's perhaps lots of uh complicated data across that object. Um calibrating to do with >> so calibrating uncertainty uh has several meanings uh but one you know the most common interpretation is how do we assess a distribution so you're familiar with weather forecasters uh you know maybe one weather forecaster says tomorrow it'll rain with probably 40%. Another one says 30%. and then it does or doesn't rain and that those prediction processes repeat over a year. Uh and how do we at the end say who is a good forecaster and who is a poor forecaster. Okay. And so calibration is a way of measuring the skill of forecasts. In our setting it often means something slightly different. So it means how can we adjust the forecasts to achieve calibration which is a particular kind of property. So particularly in these big complex models um we want to adjust the input parameters for those models so that we get forecasts that have properties we like and we call that calibration of computer models and so it's how we do that efficiently is a challenge when we have these models of the heart for example um we might start by doing an MRI scan to learn the shape of the heart and then we build model that models processes on that shape. But the processes all have these three parameters. So for example, how fast does the tissue conduct electrical waves? Uh you know, and they might conduct electrical waves differently in in what we call a fiber direction in certain directions to other directions, which is how the cells line up. So that's two parameters that we have that we can turn to try and get the models to align with um the data we have. So so that's kind of what we're doing there. We're we're twisting those knobs, turning those knobs to try and find a good setting of our simulator so that it replicates the data we're seeing. >> And then the final part of that uh of that name of program is leveraging uncertainty. So what what do you what do you do with that? So I guess that's where it gets more technical. Um and more kind of in mainstream computational statistics. Um so briefly is h how uh when we have a model that makes predictions that is uncertain or once we've got you know a quantification of uncertainty around it how can we use those models with that uncertainty to do things better. So often um well primarily for us that is how we speed up existing kind of methological things we do >> and that's because there's costs associated with these with these experiments to to learn those >> in our in our setting in the cardiac uh setting. Um it might be what data do we collect from the patient next. So again back to the arrhythmia setting um the patients who have arrhythmias often undergo some sort of electrical pacing where a surgeon will take over the pacing of the heart send certain signals and collect the data and so that is a very intense process only you know got all take place in an hour's surgery. So you have a limited amount of data you can connect can collect and it's kind of what uh is most valuable but there's also the sense with the computer models the computer models are expensive to run so I think Steve's group spends about £10,000 to create a model for one patient at the moment that's all a computer simulation so we want to be able to pick what are the most valuable computer simulations to do next to minimize that cost and minimize the time required And the RCL program's been running um since May and it's wrapping up soon and you were saying today is actually your last day. Um how have you found the opportunity of having this longer program and having those groups of people together? Is there something in particular that you found particularly useful or that you think you'll all take forward from this program? I mean, it's been fantastic um for me. Um you know, I've learned a lot of new maths. Uh I've learned a lot about fields I knew nothing about before and made, you know, friends and connections and future collaborators across a kind of diverse area. I think the thing that probably most people say most useful is having people from very distinct areas and statistics and machine learning and application domains. Um people who don't necessarily go to the same conferences, don't write for the same journals, don't read each other's work normally. And so having that time to spend just hanging out, hearing each other's talks, discussing, and so it's super valuable to get that cross fertilization of ideas that we don't normally get the chance to do at these kind of venues. >> So it's that it's the generosity of time, but also it's the fact that it's brought together people who wouldn't always be attending the same things. >> Absolutely. Um so for example, um there's lots of people. So I work in ging processes and there's a parallel kind of community or world that works on essentially the same ideas but calls it kernel methods and we never talk to each other normally because they have different traditions and different emphasises in style and so on. Um and so the the the kernel methods people tend to be much more mathematical technical uh proven theorems and proves and the Gaussian process side tends to be more machine learning and kind of embedded in applications and so putting those two groups together has been fascinating for understanding what we could kind of both learn and gain from each other >> and just that idea that bringing together people from really different areas. Richard was saying that, you know, there's people who are working in actually quite similar problems, but they just are in different settings, so they don't talk to each other. It's it's interesting the power of actually bringing people physically together in a place can give you that. >> Yeah. Yeah, I mean it's I think that the challenge that we've seen particularly from the biological side is that you have people like myself and like other people in the field who have either come from a an engineering and so they've done a lot of finite element numerical methods or they might have come from a a systems biology and they've had to learn some ordinary differential equations and how to solve those. Then they've had to learn enough biology to be able to kind of link those two together. And then they've had maybe some clinical information, then maybe some image processing. And you end up with with it the number of areas that you need to have becomes quite challenging. And so you see a lot of people in the the mathematical biology community I would say focused on not necessarily adopting some of these AI methods which have been used in other kind of engineering methods or engineering domains and that that kind of this interface that we're having is really allowing us to take some of the emulation methods some of the um calibration methods which come from petroleum engineering or aerospace engineering and apply those into biology where people already feel like they have to know too many Yeah, I mean that's the thing. This fascinating research happens at the boundaries of all these fields, but then how you actually find a way to let all of those people talk to each other at the right level is a is a real challenge. It it is I think it requires a comfortableness with admitting that you don't know things and a comfortableness which with hoping you know something and opening your mouth to articulate your idea and then having a kind of a constructive space to discuss those ideas. And it really requires it requires everyone to want to do that. And so you need to have mathematicians who are going to uh accept that the problem might not be defined in exactly the equation that they want to see. And it requires the biologist to at least attempt to get their problem into the mathematical form that the uh the mathematician would like to see. And that that can be a challenging dialogue. But but but both both sides need to want that to happen. I think I think for mathematicians it's it's often the need to compromise. Um so so mathemat you know a particular framework where you assume certain things are true uh and working outwards to some sort of conclusion whereas I think particularly in you know medical fields we don't necessarily know the true setting and there's more uncertainty and we we might have to compromise in places in our kind of analysis to make progress in other directions and I think that can be uncomfortable sometimes for mathematicians. So it's by having So it's the fact that you're bringing together not just bringing together the people but you're bringing them together in a space that makes it clear that this is what it's for. It's for those crossd disciplinary no stu no question is stupid all points are you're bringing all points are going to be bringing good content to it >> for me the Isaac Newton Institute is just it's just a fantastic space and I think the the infrastructure and support and the kind of the processes they have to enable people to come together uh is is excellent and not to be underestimated. that I think the the administrative staff there do just a fantastic job and [clears throat] you know there's that that that's a an important part of it is as well because everyone's busy going somewhere for a time it's a commitment it's a and but you turn up and it all works really wonderfully so I think that they really have done a great job there and it's a great asset