at the Fields Institute, uh and welcome to the Fields Institute uh Coxeter lecture series. So, this series is named after uh I never remember his full name, Harold Scott MacDonald Coxeter, uh who's one of the great geometers of the 20th century, a faculty member here at UFT. You probably know various things uh other than this lecture series that were named after Coxeter, Coxeter groups, Coxeter graphs, and so on. He was also um a musician. And if you look out in the lobby, this piano, uh which we I guess also named after Coxeter, is the Coxeter piano, uh was in his house. So, this was his uh piano. Uh Coxeter had a relationship with the Fields from its opening. Uh he was very involved until he passed away in 2003. Uh the piano doesn't work right now, but we're we're working on that. It's it's being repaired. Um I was also I was reading about Coxeter on Wikipedia recently. He lived quite a long life, so I think he was maybe 96 years old when he passed away. And somewhat predictably, I think later in life people would ask him what uh how he got to be so old. Uh and so, there were three things to which he attributed his longevity. Uh one was exercise. He had a a regular exercise program. Uh the other was uh his diet. He was vegetarian, and he thought this helped. Uh and apparently also every night he would drink a glass of soy milk with uh Kahlúa and peach schnapps. So, uh unfortunately, I didn't learn this in enough time to have some Kahlúa and peach schnapps at the reception, but maybe maybe next time. Um You probably don't want the soy milk just on its own, but we I guess we could arrange that. Um So, yeah, this lecture series is is in honor of uh Donald Coxeter. Uh and so, it's my pleasure to introduce this year's speaker, uh Mihalis Dafermos, uh who's the Henry Burchard Fine Professor of mathematics at Princeton University and also holds the Lowndean Professorship of Astronomy and Geometry at the University of Cambridge and is a member of the Institute of Applied and Computational Mathematics fourth in Heraklion, Crete. Um and so as many of you know, Professor Dafermos is one of the world's leading figures in mathematics of general relativity uh and in particular Einstein equations, black holes, singularities and cosmic censorship. Uh not a coincidence with the topic of of this week's workshop. &gt;&gt; Uh and the the lecture series uh is entitled The Mathematics of Black Holes: Recent Advances and Conjectures and lecture one, the title is Black Hole Basics. So I'm hoping to learn a lot here myself as a someone who definitely needs the basics. Uh so please join me in welcoming Professor Dafermos. &gt;&gt; So thanks a lot. I hope everyone can hear me. Let me just say at the outset that it's a real honor to give these uh lectures uh these Coxeter lectures. Of course Coxeter was associated to both uh institutions that I'm currently associated with. He was of course a a product of the University of Cambridge uh student there, PhD student, research fellow. But he also spent two very formative uh years in Princeton in in the 1930s. Um and certainly it's a it's a name that I know from the very beginning of my undergraduate days. Let me also say that even though you probably don't associate Coxeter with the theory of partial differential equations, he certainly is very, very associated with four-dimensional geometry. This is really something one of his big loves. But actually uh Coxeter did write two papers in general relativity, or at least two papers in general relativity that that I were that I'm able to dig up. Moreover, he was very good uh friends uh with J. L. Synge, who was a prominent relativist here before moving back to Ireland around 1950. Um and he very much influenced Roger Penrose, who will appear in in in this talk. So, in some sense, the the influence of of Coxeter, one way or another, is present in in this talk, I hope. &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; All right. So, without further ado, I'm going to begin. Let me warn the various experts in the field who are here for this workshop. This talk is not for you. Um so, feel free to do whatever uh &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; including not be here. But if if you remain, I hope that you find it at least enjoy it. All right. So, I've given the title for today, Black Hole Basics uh for mathematicians, and the outline of what I want to say. So, first of all, I want to tell you what what is a black hole. This is something much simpler to understand than its undeserved reputation. So then, uh I'm going to talk about singularities and and evolution. There's a lot of confusion. There was a lot of historic confusion about black holes, and in some sense, this this second section of the outline is going to summarize and clear that up as best possible. And the third part will be a introduction to the kinds of questions that we mathematicians and physicists ask about black holes. I've titled it rooting for black holes, and the reason is that uh hopefully by this part of the talk, you You have already understood that black holes are good and we should hope for black holes. The alternative is worse. Okay, so let's let's begin in earnest with um the first part of the outline. What is a black hole? And the answer to that is very very simple. Uh so let me even write it and I'll try not to write so far down here because I know that uh this this piece of real estate here is uh not very valuable. Um so very simple, black hole is a region of space-time which cannot communicate to far away observers. So that's what it's supposed to be and I'll write those words just so that we region of space-time which cannot communicate to far away observers. Okay. But to make sense of uh these words, I first have to tell you what's what's a space-time is, then I have to tell you what it means to communicate, and then I have to tell you what far away observers are. Okay. So let's begin with space-time. Maybe this still fits here. Um So in general relativity, space-time is a four-dimensional manifold. So I'll write this M4. It's a four-dimensional manifold with uh a metric, but it's not a Riemannian metric, it's a Lorentzian metric. So G is a Lorentzian metric. And what does Lorentzian metric mean? Well, it means that it has signature minus plus plus plus in four dimensions. And what what does that mean? Well, do people still see here or is this already bad? It's iffy. Okay. Um this is going to be funny, but I'm going to go all the way here. Sorry. But I think this is the safest. I'm going to write here. Okay. So, uh &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; so what does it mean? It means that in the tangent space, so imagine this is the manifold. Okay, this is a point P. Okay. And as usual, I'm going to draw the tangent space of the point P superimposed [clears throat] on on the manifold. And so, um so what does it mean for the a signature to be Lorentzian? It means that there's a cone in this tangent space looking like this, consisting of vectors whose norm squared or however you want to say that, so g v v is equal to zero. These are the so-called null vectors. Okay, so in Riemannian geometry, of course, if the vector has norm squared zero, then it's the zero vector. The whole point of the Lorentzian signature is that uh you can have vectors which are non-zero and yet their norm squared is zero. So, we call these null vectors and this cone, if you want, in 3 + 1 dimensions, it separates the tangent space into three regions. So, the two regions inside the cone and one region outside the cone. And the the two regions inside the cone, they consist of vectors Let's call this W. Such that the norm squared is negative. Okay? Um and uh the read the vectors outside the cone, let's call this I've run out of letters already, Y. So, these are vectors such that the the norm squared is positive, what you're maybe more used to from Euclidean geometry. So, uh these vectors, we call them time-like. These vectors, we call them space-like. And as I said, these vectors here we call them null. So, um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, there's one more piece of information that uh we always uh assume in in in in general relativity. So, of course, here's a point P, there's this cone. Here's a point Q. And there's a there's another cone. I'll also assume that there's a consistent way to continuously choose the sort of the top part of the cone, and I'll I'll call that the future cone. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Okay? Okay. So, the structure needed for that is something called the time orientation. So, we'll strictly speaking always assume that we have a time orientation. And this allows us to talk about the future. So, in particular, now the time-like and null vectors which are on or in the future cone, we call them future directed. Okay? And the other ones, we call them past directed. But, we're progressive, so we always look to the future. All right. So, now um I can tell you what are the fundamental sort of postulates, kinematic postulates of general relativity. It's basically that a an observer in space-time So, the trajectory of an observer in space-time is something called a worldline. So, fundamental postulate is that the tangent vector of such a worldline should always be a future-directed time-like vector. And for massless particles or photons, light, then we also allow null future-directed null vectors. So, you should think this is the trajectory of a massive particle or an observer like me, and this is the trajectory of a of a photon, and however it's going it always should be its tangent should be future-directed, null if it's a photon, and it should be future-directed time-like if it's not. And then freely falling observers correspond to time-like geodesics, and actual photons they they actually correspond to null geodesics, and geodesic means exactly what it means as in a Riemannian geometry. Okay? So, the the trajectory satisfies the geodesic equation, which you can write down independent of the signature of the metric. Okay. So, so in particular um what does it mean that this space-time point, so space-time points we traditionally call events in Lorentzian geometry. What does it mean that this event can communicate with another event? It means precisely that there is some future-directed time-like or at worst no curve connecting the two events. Okay? So, this structure that I just talked about, the structure of the time-oriented Lorentzian metric, tells you which events can communicate with which other events. Okay. So, we know what space-time um is, we know what it means to communicate. Maybe at this point I should say I should pay lip service to the fact that general relativity is not just about Lorentzian metrics that you can write down like there's no tomorrow. Um so, uh Einstein also postulated an equation that the metric is supposed to satisfy. So, what is that equation? Well, in general, that equation you can write it if you want like as follows, that the Ricci curvature of the metric, and for those of you who know Riemannian geometry, the Ricci curvature in Lorentzian geometry is exactly the same thing. Um for those of you who don't know Riemannian geometry, then this is just some trace of the Riemann curvature tensor, which again is some higher-dimensional generalization of the Gaussian curvature, which I assume you probably do know. Um so, the general equations are that this Ricci curvature should be something that has to do with the matter. Because in general, like it or not, there's matter in the universe. Um Now, in the special case of vacuum, so let's let's say you're in a region of the universe where there's vacuum, then this term is actually zero, and so the equation is simply that the the space-time geometry should be Ricci flat. Okay. So, this is uh Einstein's uh famous equation from 1915. All right. So, well, later in this lecture series we'll talk more about the PDE aspects of this equation, but for now, um, let's leave that at that. So, um, so I want to tell you what it means to, uh, communicate, uh, to to not be able to communicate far away observers. So, I guess first it'd be useful to tell you what it means to be able to communicate far away observers. So, hopefully we have our first, uh, non-trivial example. So, this is, uh, Minkowski space. So, here's an example of a Lorentzian, uh, four-dimensional manifold. So, the spacetime is R4, and I'll call the coordinates t, x, y, and z. Okay? So, it's the usual R4, and the metric is this expression here: - dt squared + dx squared + dy squared + dz squared. So, this minus is what makes it Lorentzian. And already it might be useful to record its form in, um, in spherical polar coordinates. So, this will be useful when comparing to other metrics that I'll write down later. And well, the real way to sort of try to visualize a Lorentzian geometry is to somehow draw the the the the light cones, or the future light cones, cuz remember we're progressive, so we have a time orientation. And so, I've done exactly that. So, this is a a picture uh of the future light cones in in Minkowski space. So, now I can somehow tell you what I mean by, um, so this, uh, spacetime does not have a black hole, and the reason it does not have a black hole is that every event can communicate to far away observers. So, for the purpose of this talk, you should think far away observers is the region of space time R is greater than equal to some capital R where some capital R you fix some large capital R. All right. So that's to say it's it's it's it's the region way out there way out there, right? And so the statement is simply that okay, if I take any point then I can always find for instance a a null trajectory okay, that goes very far away. So you can be a little more sophisticated and say that well, I want you know, I want to look at the you know, this the events that can can can um the set of events that can um communicate with this region no no matter how big R is and of course you get the same Okay. So any of these will do for today. It's what it means to communicate to far away points. Okay. And this by the way is a solution of the um Einstein uh equations of 1915 in vacuum trivially, okay? Because if you know anything about what curvature is supposed to be, this has zero Riemann curvature so in particular zero Ricci curvature. All right. Okay. So um So that's uh that's Minkowski space. So what about black holes? So remarkably the first space time that turned out to have a black hole um region was uh discovered uh a month in fact less than a month after the final form of these equations was written down. So namely already in in December of um 19 15 and that's the famous Schwarzschild metric. So um So there you have it there. So this metric expression that I've written down here is actually a one parameter family of metrics. You can interpret this so the parameter is capital M. Actually, if you set M to zero, you'll notice this is just the Minkowski metric in in polar coordinates. You can interpret this for all real values of M, but I'm only going to talk about the positive M, at least for now. And so, it turns out that in the in in the case of positive M, this the the space-time naturally associated with this metric contains a black hole region. Now, um I should say that already that that sentence, understanding that sentence, took many, many years in the history of general relativity. Oh, did I Yeah, there's an there's an inverse. So, sorry. 1 - 2M over R inverse. And actually, that inverse is very important. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; So, thank you, Diederik. Because, um that inverse is exactly why um there was so much confusion in in in the history of general relativity. Because, of course, if you write this expression and in view of this inverse, this this expression looks to be singular at r equals 2M. So, um in fact, this was traditionally known as the the Schwarzschild singularity. So, it it turns out that uh this is not singular at r equals 2M. In fact, the situation at r equals 2M is completely analogous with the fact that the um spherical metric, if you write it like that, is degenerate when, let's say, theta equals zero. Something that never confused everyone because they knew what the sphere was. But, in the case of uh Schwarzschild, they didn't sort of know what what the differential structure of the domain should be a priori. You should really think that that's sort of that's an unknown in the actual function. Okay. But, we're going to fast forward to not repeat the mistakes of the past because we're progressive um to the solution of this problem, which was provided by Lemaître in 1932. And um Lemaître wrote down uh a form of the Schwarzschild metric, which is manifestly regular at r = 2m, and let me write it down. So, um So, this is Schwarzschild al Lemaître. So, actually, the coordinates that I'm going to use are not the same as um the coordinates that Lemaître used, but they are morally the same. So, he wrote down something very similar. Um So, turns out, and this is again an exercise for anyone bored, uh by a change of coordinates and then renaming the coordinates, you can rewrite that metric as the following expression. So, - 1 - 2m on r dt squared + 1 + 2m on r dr squared, and there's no inverse now, and this is a plus. Um uh and now we have uh plus r squared the usual spherical metric that we know and love. And then there's this funny cross term 4 m on r dr dt. So, um So, it turns out that this is isometric uh to to to that locally in the region r greater than 2m, it's also isometric to that in the region are less than 2m, but it extends smoothly across R equals 2m. So, you can think of this as a a metric which is smooth everywhere except when R is equal to zero. So, its domain is this take away um R equals zero. Okay, so that's the domain. Okay, and this is the metric. So, now uh how do we understand the geometry of this metric? We try to uh draw the light cones. And here is my uh claim. Um So, what I claim is the following. So, there's a hypersurface R equals 2m. And if you look at the light cones on R equals 2m, you notice that the vector d by dt is null. You can read that off from here, okay, because 1 minus 2m on R, that's zero when R is 2m. So, um so, if you think about it, on the other hand, uh you can also read that the vector field d by dr is space-like. You can also read that from there. So, if you think about it, and okay, you have to think a little bit about the time orientation, let me not tell you what is the time orientation, but it's sort of the the usual one at infinity, so that uniquely determines it, tells you that the null cones on R equals 2m, they look like this. So, they're tangent to R equals 2m, and they tilt inside. Okay. So, when you're on R equals 2m, the the null cones are actually now tangent. And now what happens when you're when R is less than 2M? Well, if you think about it, uh d by dt is now time like, so this the vector that goes up. So d by dt in this picture is always pointing up if you think about what this picture is actually representing. It's just a picture of the usual R4. Okay. So this is now time like, okay? So this is now time like, d by dt. Okay? But d by dr is again uh space like and it looks like this. And so you can convince yourself that the future null cones, they look like this. Oh, I I said it wrong, right? Wrong. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; So d by dt [laughter and gasps] is space like. So this is d by dt actually in this picture. And uh if I if I know my uh sorry. Sorry. This is ah Okay. I'm doing everything wrong. So um the picture looks like this. Right. So d by dt is space like and the the point is that So space like means that you're not in the cone. That's all it means. Okay? &gt;&gt; You have a time like direction. &gt;&gt; I'm sorry. &gt;&gt; So there's always a time like direction. Sorry. &gt;&gt; It's like always time like. &gt;&gt; So again, the So the point is the following that and this is why one shouldn't get confused. You see, even relatives can get confused in board. But you know, the nothing the fact that this is called T doesn't mean anything necessarily. Okay. Well, there's a cross term here. Okay? So, you have to um uh so you have to Yeah. Okay. Exercise. Now, I have Yeah. Make the talk more interesting. Okay. So, you can falsify general relativity. All right. Okay. So, um So, similarly here, let me draw it cuz I've been speaking. Okay. So, you should think that this is always d by dt, okay, but it's space-like. Okay? This is d by dr. It's again space-like, and so you can convince yourself the null cones, they look like this. Okay? And remember that r = 0 is not in my domain. Now, of course, uh so, the metric functions, they they blow up. That's easy to see. Of course, they blew up before once DeWitt restored the inverse there, um and that didn't necessarily mean anything. But here, for instance, you can you can compute the so-called Kretschmann scalar. So, of course, the scalar curvature of this metric, that's maybe the easiest thing to compute, but this is a Ricci flat metric, so that's zero. So, that's that's not going to blow up, but the Kretschmann uh scalar, which is a scalar contraction, a quadratic uh contraction of the Riemann curvature tensor, that that blows up. So, that tells you that there is something singular there. Okay. All right. So, um maybe at this point I can say a little bit of um uh terminology even though it's slightly a historical. So, the matter already understood this in 1932, but unfortunately, this understanding uh was also confined in this black hole region and did not propagate to uh observers to to infinity. Um So, um so, we call this uh boundary the so-called event horizon. And I claim this is exactly the boundary of the region of space-time that cannot communicate to far away observers. So, why is that the case? Well, if you're inside this region, then the null cones are always oriented like this, which means that if I'm a time-like future-directed curve, then R is always decreasing. Okay? So, if I'm a time-like future-directed curve, R is always decreasing. Okay? And in the marginal case here, if I'm a photon, then R can remain constant. Okay? And so, I stay on this hyper-surface, otherwise R is decreasing and I enter this region. Okay? So, either way, I certainly cannot send a signal to far away observers. In fact, I cannot send a signal to any observer uh which is outside of the region R less than or equal to 2M. Okay? So, this is why we call this a black hole. And the um boundary of the black hole we call event horizon. Okay. So, um So, maybe I should say a few uh more things about uh black hole geometries. So, um So, essentially, there are two kinds of observers in uh uh geometry. There are the um the Greek observers who they elect to fall into the black hole and then in finite time, so time in general relativity is precisely length measured by this metric, so it's the length of this curve. Okay? They reach r = 0 singularity. So, they reach a curvature singularity. And in fact, you can show, this is a more difficult computation, that they are torn apart by infinite tidal forces. So, that just means if I give hands and legs to my observer, then these hands and legs are actually Jacobi fields. That's what we all know in differential geometry, right? Hands and legs are Jacobi. And so, you can see what what happens to these Jacobi fields and depending on how they're oriented, then they're they're infinitely stretched or infinitely compressed. Okay? So, that's a very bad uh demise. Okay. But, the Canadian observers who don't do such rash things, um, so observers who don't elect to fall into the black hole, um, they they can exist for all time, so in particular there are freely falling observers, okay? Who safely stay out of black holes and they they happily live forever in this space-time. Okay. So, those are two things to know about space-time. Yes? &gt;&gt; Especially for this particular example, is that possible for outside the horizon to break through the friction? &gt;&gt; Yes. So, &gt;&gt; But, like at this point it's like it's I'm like it's it restricts to this horizon is that into this direction? &gt;&gt; So, there's no there's no problem if if you know this, the way these are oriented. Okay? There's no problem having a trajectory that goes like this. &gt;&gt; Oh, sorry. Sorry. &gt;&gt; Yeah. But not the other way. That's the whole point. So, it's a one-way membrane. Okay. All right. So, um So, this is a uh early example of a black hole, but again, the understanding of this came much much later. Um And in fact, uh something else that came much much later and was a big surprise is that um this one-parameter family of um black holes is actually a a one-parameter subfamily of a larger two-parameter family of vacuum black holes that was discovered only much much later by Roy Kerr in 1963. And I've written uh the Kerr metric possibly correctly. So, unlikely, but its precise form won't really matter at all, essentially, for the purpose of this talk. Um And the one thing that I want to point out is that it's not infinitely uh complicated, but nonetheless, sort of you don't find it by sort of trial and error. And in fact, there are many algebraic miracles that are sort of hidden in this expression that will be relevant uh in later uh talks in this series. So, uh just a few words about uh uh the Kerr black hole. So, um So, like uh Schwarzschild black hole, this is a stationary spacetime. And what stationary means is that there is a killing field uh which in this case is actually d by dt. And d by dt far away is timelike. Okay? But as we already established, d by dt in the black hole is actually space like. Okay? So, if you have a black hole space time with a killing field which far away is time like we call it stationary. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, um So, you might ask are there more stationary vacuum uh black hole space times? And the uh conjectural answer to that is uh no. So, these uh Kerr family is thought to represent the unique stationary uh family of of black hole space times. And that's already quite amazing because it's a finite it's a two parameter family and that's it. Okay? That's a very rare thing in astronomy if these are supposed to be objects in actual astronomy. Um So, so that uh that is supposedly the case and that will be relevant for things I'll say later. So, I should say that there are under some assumptions, some statement of that form have been proven, but in general that question of uniqueness of this family is actually open and maybe the the best known results in the smooth category are actually due to Spiros and Xanthopoulos and some of his collaborators. Okay. So, um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, maybe I'll also mention already just for lip service although I won't write it down that uh like it or not, there is matter in the universe and in the case of matter or in the case where you add a cosmological constant to um the Einstein equations, there are more general stationary black hole solutions. So, solutions that have this geometry, solve the Einstein equations, and have this this killing field which far away uh is is is time like. Uh so, in the Einstein-Maxwell case, so-called Reissner-Nordström and more generally Kerr-Newman family. In the case of cosmological constant the Schwarzschild de Sitter and Kerr de Sitter family and I will also mention these black hole families later in the series. But for today we can stick to Schwarzschild and Kerr. Okay. So that's what is a black hole. So we can go onward to uh the issue of singularities and evolution. So I've already told you that in the Schwarzschild black hole there is this singularity and uh originally when these metrics were written down of course as I already told you there was a lot of confusion of even what where where is the singularity in the Schwarzschild metric but in any case um people's reaction to the presence of singularity was I see a solution that has a singularity I throw away the solution because I don't like singularities. This was very very much Einstein's original reaction to the Schwarzschild singularity even though in his case really the Schwarzschild singularity for him meant this coordinate singularity at r equals 2m. But somehow this was um this let's call it prejudice against singularities was um Let's see if I can actually do it like this. So this prejudice against singularities was &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; overturned if you want in a very influential work of Oppenheimer and Snyder. Which unfortunately because of the fact that it appeared in 1939 was not really digested by the community until much later. So many of you who have seen the Oppenheimer film this this paper actually appears in the film. And what they um understood okay? It's very unfortunate that they couldn't draw this picture. So I'll get back to the providence of this picture per se. Um but in any case what they understood is that you can add a collapsing star to this picture. So what it what it means is the following that you can think of this space time the four chilled space time ala the matter as a rising dynamically from a star which collapses. So this is a T equals zero slice of space time. And you can imagine that you have initially a star okay? Um and the star is made up of fluid which is however pressureless. Okay? So we can talk about this in general relativity it means looking at the Einstein equations coupled to uh pressureless perfect fluid sometimes called the Einstein dust system. And you can let this evolve. Okay? And um what the what happens is the the star contracts. So I'm drawing a picture of the star evolved in space time so it's contracting. And now okay. Let's see if I can do this like this. Maybe it's like this. So the star contracts like this. Okay? And I'm going to shade this all in. So here you have a star, and I'm not going to tell you exactly what the geometry looks like. In the support of the star. What they showed, however, is that the space-time looks like this, if you want. And outside of the star, you have exactly Lemaître's version of the Schwarzschild metric. So in particular, um you again have a region of of space-time that cannot communicate with far-away observers. Okay? So in particular, you again have an event horizon now, actually. The event horizon, its boundary over here will look something like this. But for late time, okay? The boundary of the event horizon, the event horizon is exactly as as it was in Schwarzschild. So um &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So once this was understood and digested, which did take around 25 years, but in any case, it somehow made untenable the point of view that I see a space-time with a singularity, I throw away the space-time. Because uh you can't throw away space-time because something that happened in the future. The only thing you can use as a criteria is initial data. And [snorts] what you should really think is that the initial data here is impeccable. So this is from star, in fact, you can make this star very, very big. And if it's the bigger it is, then the less dense it is initially. Okay? So there is nothing funny about the initial data, at least first approximation. Okay? Nonetheless, all this happens in in evolution. Okay. So, the argument that oh, I can just forget about uh space-times that have singularities uh doesn't really pan out because these things can happen even for perfectly good initial data. And you don't know until you've solved the equations. So, as a little aside, one of the reasons that this was confusing and was difficult to accept is because understanding more generally the theory as a dynamic theory took some time and took a major mathematical result. So, just as an aside, I want to mention what you could call the fundamental theorem of general relativity. And okay, in the context of today, this is an aside, but this will certainly be useful for the later talks. Um and this is a theorem proven in 1952 by Yvonne Choquet-Bruhat. Who many of you might know passed away um a year and a half ago uh at a very advanced age, maybe more advanced than Coxeter, so at the age of 102. And um what she showed is that even for the vacuum equations, then you should you can and should think of general relativity dynamically. That's to say, the way to think about the vacuum equations is as follows. You can pose &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; initial data at what you might want to think about as t equals zero. And actually, initial data is not really t equals zero because there's no t in general, but it's a three-manifold sigma. Um together with a Riemannian metric, so you should think of this as the induced geometry on the three-manifold. That's what it will be. Okay? And you also need the second fundamental form of this. Um now it turns out these also have to satisfy some constraints. If you know your differential geometry, you can probably already predict why by taking uh sort of traces of of the uh Gauss-Codazzi equations of sub-manifold theory. But in any case, there's a notion of suitable initial data, and if you give me such data of sufficient smoothness, then there's a space-time M {comma} G that satisfies um the Einstein vacuum equations that arises from that initial data. Okay? So even in the vacuum, there's a lot of degrees of freedom because you know, there's an infinite-dimensional set of initial data, and for each initial datum, then there exists a solution. And moreover, and this was actually a slightly subtle point that was clarified in later work of Choquet-Bruhat and Geroch. Um you can associate a a maximal such solution, which is then unique. Okay? So this this is work from I guess '69. Okay. Say again? No. So for instance, this is a good example of a incomplete manifold. But it's maximal. Let me It's a very good question you asked, but I'll pretend you didn't because the answer is very related to things that I won't talk in in the talk, but I I'm happy to talk to you after. Okay? All right. So, um Okay. So, actually, um it turns out that uh and this is much more recent that this picture uh namely constructing a a black hole in evolution from completely impeccable initial data, in fact, constructing an exact Schwarzschild black hole in evolution from uh impeccable uh initial data, you can you can actually do in vacuum. That's to say, you don't need a star to make a black hole. Uh you can do it with gravitational waves. Okay? And this follows from uh work of Christodoulou, and then there's um actually very recent work of Kayll and and Unger who do this with a clever uh gluing construction, which is itself based on work of Areifakis in some of his works. Uh Simic and Rodnianski. Okay. So, um So, like it or not, uh black holes and singularities, they they they form in evolution. They form from perfectly fine initial data. So, you can't get out of this by just saying, "Yeah, I don't like singularities. I throw away this." So, um Okay. So, uh So, what can you say if you still want to be a a naysayer? You can say the following words, and it's completely reasonable that, "Okay. Yeah, this is one solution, but it's a very special solution. In particular, this example here is very symmetric. Um the star that was um used by Oppenheimer-Snyder is uh pressureless. It's actually homogeneous in in its in the domain of the star. So, maybe this is something very, very fine-tuned. And it's here where Penrose came along. And what So, actually this picture that I've drawn is first appears in a famous 1965 paper of Penrose. And the picture is almost as important as the theorem in the paper. So, I've already drawn the picture, but let me also tell you the theorem. So, of course So, what what he noticed is the following, that if you take a sphere which is here inside the event horizon, but outside the support of the star, okay? Then if you think about the the the null cone on the sphere, it looks like this. And this implies that if you look at the volume element of the sphere, and you look at its derivative in this and that direction, okay? Or area element, let's say. Um it's two-dimensional, okay? The area element. Then in in both future null directions, it's negative. Okay? So, the sphere wants to contract. So, that property defines what he called a trapped surface. And what he showed is that if you have a spacetime that evolves from data like this, and has a trapped surface, then it's necessarily geodesically incomplete. That's to say, there necessarily will be observers like this. Maybe they don't fall into a singularity, he couldn't prove that, but they will only live for some reason for finite time. So, the reason this theorem um and in the interest of time, let me not try to write down that theorem. But the the reason that theorem is so important is that the existence of such a closed trapped surface turns out to be a stable property. What does that mean? If it's true for some solution and I wiggle the initial data ever so slightly and I solve the Einstein equations like Yvonne Choquet brought told us we could, then the solution of the wiggled initial data will still have the property. So, what does it mean? It means that singularity or at least you know, the presence of observers who only live for finite time, freely falling observers who only live for finite time, does not go away. So, okay. So, that's part two of the talk. So, now finally I can tell you why we should root for black holes. So, to understand why we should root for black holes, then maybe it's good to understand what is the alternative and maybe I'll restore time orientation to boards so that this always looks like it's supposed to. So, &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, if you want Penrose's theorem says that in general singularities they do occur, they do occur even for impeccable initial data. So, what what is the alternative to this? Well, you should think the alternative to this is a space-time that again starts from impeccable initial data. It evolves nicely according to Yvonne Choquet-Bruhat's theorem. And then suddenly, there's a singularity. The The curvature blows up. It's a non-linear hyperbolic PDE. Things like that happen. Okay? But imagine that so the the curvature blows up. Of course, if the curvature blows up, this actual point is not part of the manifold. It's sort of you should think of it as a boundary point. But you can imagine that as you go close and you look at the null cones, they stay upright like like they did in Minkowski space, more or less. So, if this is the case, then uh no matter how close I am to the singularity, I can send a signal to very far observers. Okay? So, that's a so-called naked singularity. So, why is this bad? Well, it's bad for many reasons. First of all, uh you see the singularity and you might not want You know, there's lots of things you'd rather not see. Um we don't seem to see such singularities. So, you know, that might indicate that this theory is not true if the theory predicts such such things. And Okay? That again leaves us in a bad situation. Um but there's actually something even worse, which is the following. It's not only that I I see this, but somehow, let's say I want to predict my future. I'm an observer here with my hands and legs. And I want to predict what happens to me. I want to say that after I see this, you know, I'll still be there and something will happen and the thing that happens to me will be predicted by the Einstein equations of general relativity. Well, the problem is that because I'm seeing something from this singularity and information propagates from here, in order to know what happens to me here, I need to know what what happens at this point. If I don't know what happens at this point, the Einstein equations can never tell me what happens there. But things blow up here, so the equations don't make sense. So, if you have naked singularities, then the theory is not predictive, not only for the Greek observers who sort of go to the singularity and go to the singularity, but even for the Canadians who stay very far away. They don't They don't do anything dangerous cuz they're wise. Okay. So, um so you might hope actually that um So, okay, on on a second thought, now looking back at black holes, you see what I was trying to tell you before, that that black holes you should think of them as good. Because given that we know that there is singularity, given that we know that there're going to be these incomplete observers, we'd rather not be them. And black holes give us uh give the theory a way to hide its incompleteness in these regions and so that for all of us here in Canada, we can keep on observing to our heart's content. Uh and all everything we observe will have always have been predicted by Einstein's theory from the initial data. So, um so it's this it's this sense in which you should think about um Einstein's about uh black holes as being good. Now that we know that singularity is inevitable, this is a great way for theory to deal with singularity. Okay. So, it might have been nice if naked singularities did not occur in the Einstein equations. So, actually there have been for a long time known examples of naked singularities when you couple the Einstein equations to various things of various, let's say, degrees of realisticness. That's a word. But, quite surprisingly, much more recently, Jacob Shapiro and Igor Rodnianski actually showed that you have such naked singularities even in the vacuum. Okay. So, unfortunately, you can put together some initial data by focusing in the right way some gravitational waves. We don't know how to do this in the lab, but anyway. And if you set it just right, you can actually create spacetimes that have exactly this. So, that's a problem, and that's why one of the main open issues in the field is to resolve the following conjecture, which was first posed by Penrose, who was really the first who understood some of these issues. So, the conjecture This conjecture dates back to the '60s, says that, "Okay, maybe these indeed can occur. After all, Jacob and his collaborator proved that they do. But, for generic initial data singularities are and I'll put this in quotes, they're always hidden in black holes. All right. So, this you can apply it to any reasonable Einstein matter system, but in particular for the Einstein vacuum equations because one of the beautiful things about general relativity is a big difference from Newtonian theory. In Newtonian theory, if there's no matter, there's no gravity. But, in Einstein's theory, you have all the phenomenology essentially already in the vacuum. Okay? So, this is already non-trivial in in in the vacuum. So, yes, there are some special initial data that you have naked singularities, but for generic initial data, uh singularities are always hidden in black holes. So, this uh conjecture is known as weak cosmic censorship. So, I won't explain the word weak. But, if anyone is interested, they can talk to me later. But, cosmic censorship is uh the idea is that singularities are generically censored by black holes. Okay? So, black holes have the very important um censorship duty. Okay. So, um So, it'd be great if this problem is um resolved. This is one of the great unsolved problems of classical general relativity. Um I don't expect it to be resolved anytime soon, at least not in the affirmative. Um but um before resolving this, there's a simpler problem that it makes sense to resolve, which is if we don't try to understand all initial data for the Einstein vacuum equations, but we just want to understand data which initially is very close to this, to Schwarzschild, or more generally to this Kerr family, then whether this statement is true for such data, in particular, whether those black hole spacetimes are stable. So, simpler problem. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So, is the conjecture true in the neighborhood of Schwarzschild or Kerr black holes themselves. And uh so, the more generally, is there exterior regions, the part of these spacetimes that is outside of the black hole, is that stable in some sense? So, that's a problem that there's a been a lot of work in the last 20 years, and in some sense, as a community, we are on the threshold of a complete solution of of this problem, and I'll uh I'll discuss that in in the second lecture. So, I should say one thing about the third lecture, and then finish with this. So, um so, the Kerr family of spacetimes is actually represents the hole solutions if the Kerr parameters satisfy the following inequality that this parameter A, which actually measures, if you want, the rotation of the black holes. The Kerr black holes are actually rotating in some sense. Talk about geometry of that next time. So, in suitable units, this rotation parameter in modulus should be less than equal to the mass parameter. And the case of equality is called extremal Kerr. And it turns out that the extremal case is a very interesting threshold between being a black hole and something else. And because of that, this this kind of problem, the stability problem in the neighborhood of extremality, requires you to understand threshold behavior and requires you to actually try to understand geometrically the infinite-dimensional space of all solutions of the Einstein vacuum equations. So, in in the third lecture, I'll talk about the version of the stability problem in the neighborhood of extremality, and this is really properly thought of as the study of the geometry of the moduli space in in the neighborhood of extremal Kerr. And that's really where a lot of the the very exciting things in the field are going on now, and a lot of the talks in this workshop are are actually about. Okay, so with that, I finish. Sorry to go over. Thank you.
