Holly Fer from Cambridge indeed who's going to give our survey talk on arithmetic dynamics. &gt;&gt; All right. Thank you to uh the other organizers [laughter] for having me give a talk. So um yeah I'm local. So if you weren't here yesterday I'm a person who you can ask questions about Cambridge. My student Aisha is also such a person. So uh I encourage you to do so. So for the talk today um right I I don't want to assume anybody knows any number theory which I hope is like getting enthusiastic nods from at least a couple of people. So but what I want to do is present to you sort of the two main like purely number theoretic tools that arithmetic dynamicists algebraic dynamicists and even complex dynamicists use to answer questions that require arithmetic. Okay. And so I'm going to do that via sort of two example theorems or conjectures. In fact, they're not fully answered. Um questions which are not arithmetic in nature. Okay, but which require arithmetic dynamics to answer. All right. So the first one is essentially the question of how many periodic points or pre-periodic points determine a rational map. Okay. So, so let's assume I've got a map for me. I I can't bring myself to write remon sphere. I just always write P1 over C. Um but my maps are irrational. So every map in this talk will be algebraic. Okay, defined by polomials. And so what is the meaningful interpretation of this question? I mean so of course if you recall the period or the pre-p period and the period of a lot of points of your map that completely determines your map, right? And so really we're asking this question in a set theoretic way that if you hand me a set of points which I know are pre-periodic for the map, to what extent does that pin down the map? And so here's the conjecture which I'll explain uh sort of why we make this conjecture. Um and this appears in a paper of Laura DeMarco, myself and Hashiier where we prove a case of this conjecture which is that um for all D greater than or equal to two there exists a constant say B of D depending on D such that if two maps of degree D oops sorry do not have the same set of preperiodic points. So for f and g of degree d then in fact they have at most b common pre-periodic points. So the intersection of the preeriodic loi is no larger than b of d. Okay. And there's a couple of sort of pieces of content to this conjecture. I mean the first thing is the statement that and this is a theorem due to Matt Baker and Laura there's lots of Bakers this month by the way Matt Baker and Laura DeMarco um that if the set of pre-periodic points don't coincide for two rational maps then in fact their intersection is finite okay so that's a theorem the assertion that we're making in the conjecture is that that finitness is bounded in a uniform sense that depends only on degree okay the dependence on degree is definitely necessary neessary right just by interpolation if I wanted to choose you know 1 million points that two rational maps both had as common preeriodic points I could just make them fixed points of really large degree maps right and so then we would have that many points at least in common so this bound has to depend on degree okay um but this conjecture is not yet answered in in full generality as stated so I'll talk later about when I uh give you the approach I'll talk later about what's known all right so that's the first question. So again, not a priori arithmetic, at least not the question. The second one is perhaps more algebraic and I will use a little bit of algebra geometric language here to say this the right way, but I'll tell you what you can think of if you don't like algebraic geometry. All right? So let me say this carefully and use the same notation I'm going to use later. So let's suppose that we have an algebraic dynamical system. Okay. So in generality what that would mean is a quasi projective variety. If you don't like those words you should think about just an n- dimensional complex space. Okay. And a rational map. This is a map defined by polomials but possibly not defined on some locus where um all of the points of x satisfy an additional algebraic relation. Okay, this is as a risky open condition if you are happy with the language of algebraic geometry. Um if you don't want to think about that and if you're thinking in this world just think about f as being defined by polomials or even rational maps. in the variables. Okay. And let's suppose that we have what's known as an observable or in algebraic geometric language just another rational map but now taking values in the remon sphere. Okay. In the projective line. So and let's suppose that we have some kind of fundamentally simple algebraic object in which this map might take values. So suppose that we have gamma which is a finitely generated multiplicative subgroup of C star. Okay. And then the question is how can orbits under the rational map f interact after application of pi with this finitely generated subgroup. Okay. So properly stated, can we describe for some starting point x and x the set of natural numbers such that the image of the nth iterate oh I could I'm in a friendly crowd. I don't need a little circle. The image of the nth iterate of X X not sorry under F maps under pi into this finitely generated subgroup. Okay. So what you should think about here is like you could be asking the question of take like a map from P1 to P1, right? A rational map and just take this to be the identity map. Okay. And I could ask about how often the orbit of a point hits powers of two, positive or negative powers of two, right? Or positive or negative powers of two and three, right? And the group generated by them. Okay? So that's the kind of problem that you should think about. Indeed, in practice, this observable is usually just like a coordinate map. Okay? That's the the cases that we're usually interested in. All right. So notice that I haven't imposed a degree restriction here by the way. So in the first question the degree is at least two. There's it's a chaotic map but this even applies to linear maps. Okay. And so there's no sort of hope of like a finitness statement of the values n here. Okay. Because you can think about the example say I'll work with a complex variable zed maps to zed plus one right and that powers of two finitely generated subgroup that I talked about earlier and if you start with the integer point you know zero or one or whatever you're going to hit this on sort of an exponentially defined index set in n okay similarly for a general p1 map if I am talking about say degree d and I take this to just you say the point set one, right? Then I'm asking about hitting a point set with my orbit. Well, that only happens more than once if I'm periodic or pre-eriodic, right? And so then I expect an arithmetic progression of indices to occur inside of this set. Okay. All right. So those are my two motivating questions. And the key point is that both of these questions are answered using Julia sets and escape rate functions. The problem is it's somehow not enough to work with the classical complex Julia sets and escape rate functions to answer these questions. What we actually want to work with at the end of the day is um an infinite collection of Julia sets and escape rate functions and that's what we gain when we work in the arithmetic setting. So let me explain to you how that works. Are the questions both clear? &gt;&gt; Question. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; For the first question. I think the pre- periodic points of two functions are equal. Do we have some relation between them? &gt;&gt; Uh yes. So in the polomial case this is totally explicit um and it's basically what you would think that they agree um up to say an iterate and a symmetry of the Julia set. In the rational map case there's also a a mostly explicit relationship but it's not quite as clean. Yeah. So and I'm happy to give you some references on that later if you want. Um so yeah it's a good point actually worth saying right it can be the case that these sets are not equal but the Julia sets have infinite overlap right and so really there's something non-complex that's being seen here right it's not just saying that the complex Julia sets only intersect finitely that's not not the case okay as we know from like interval examples right okay all right great so what are our tools here. Well, let me give you the basics. So, the situation being arithmetic simply means that I'm working in a finite extension of the rational numbers. So, a number field is any finite extension of the rational numbers. Finite field extension. All elements of a number field are algebraic meaning that they satisfy some polomial relation um over Q right so i.e the roots of a polomial with Q coefficients. And the key thing here is that Q itself as well as any number field admits not just the classical Archimedian absolute value that we're used to from viewing Q inside of the complex plane and taking modulus if you want to think about it in a complex way but also has a full collection of piic absolute values for every prime P. Okay. So in greater generality the absolute values on K are well they come in two forms. One is the so-called archimedian absolute values and this is what we're used to and this comes from any choice of embedding of your number field into the complex numbers. Okay, this is the same thing as saying if you are algebraically happy with this statement it's just the usual modulus. So evaluated at the galwa image of a point. Okay. So for each element of the galwa group we get an absolute value and that's almost true but they can be equivalent if they're complex conjugates. Okay so the point here is that somehow if I take say okay like q roo&lt;unk&gt;2 is a finite extension of Q but there's two embeddings I could send root two to roo&lt;unk&gt;2 or I could send root two to minus roo&lt;unk&gt;2 and those are both perfectly good embeddings of this field into C. Okay. And they give me different absolute values. Okay. All right. But these behave in sort of the way that we expect them to. They really studying these absolute values dynamically all comes down to complex dynamics. These archimedian ones. However, we also obtain non-archchimedian absolute values. I will describe this just for Q. Okay, it's it's I just don't want to have to talk about ideals and stuff like that, but it it's not hard to to define for a more general number field. So if P is a prime and say A over B is in lowest terms and Q define mu P of A over B to be the power of P. So the exponent rather and a over b that is a over b is equal to p m new p a over b times say u over b where p does not divide u and p does not divide b. Okay. Okay. So I pull out all the powers of p from my natural or my uh rational number rather. The exponent that appears here which is positive if p divides a and negative if p divides b is this value mu of p. Okay. Then the so-called piic absolute value can be defined be p to the minus u p of a b. Okay. So this is how we define the piodic absolute value. Trying to complete various spaces with respect to this absolute value gives periodic either integers or numbers if you like depending on whether you started with Z or Q. Um the point here is that these are still absolute values. In fact they satisfy an even stronger triangle inequality in that the the absolute value of a sum is no larger than the maximum of the absolute value of the two constituents. Okay. All right. So, the key property here and you'll see the power of this statement when I talk about the proof of question one or approaches to question one is what's called the product formula which is that we have this infinite collection of absolute values on our field. Okay, Q as I've written it or there's generalizations to a number field K, but they are not all independent. Okay, that is to say that for any nonzero element of the number field, the product I called it X. Um, let me explain my notation here. the product of all of the absolute values with respect to okay say yeah sorry I should have written notation first this is the set of absolute values up to equivalence so if my number field is q itself then this is just the usual absolute value together with one for each prime number okay um this is a set of absolute values on k this number is a normalization so that I don't care which number field I'm looking at x in because I could extend this to L and still make all of these definitions and hope for the same formula to hold. In order to make that happen, you take your absolute value, you complete it, complete the number field with respect to that absolute value. Complete Q with respect to the absolute value which restricts to an absolute value on Q. And you look at the degree of this extension compared to the total degree of the extension which is finite by definition. Okay. And the product of all of these things is equal to one. And the key point here is that one of the implications of this is that two numbers in a number field cannot be close with respect to all absolute values at once. Right? So thinking back to Alex's comment here, right? as I will make precise later having lots of common pre-periodic points should mean that Julia sets are somehow close together right for the two rational maps okay that's true maybe in the complex topology here if we can sort of push the analogy through piatically then the product formula obstructs that being true for all possible Julia sets at once okay so that's the the the goal for me to tell you enough about that for that sentence to make sense um in the next few minutes. Okay. All right. So that's the basic algebraic number theoretic stuff we need. So the good news is that we do sort of I mean we're used to thinking of Julia sets and there's a sort of slew of equivalent definitions, right? We have uh topological definitions. We have um equontinuity or normality definitions via Montel's theorem. Um and we have definitions as like the closure of the repelling periodic locus and so on, right? And so you want to say like okay I can put some meaningful topology on this number field with respect to this this paddic or vatic absolute value and then sort of promote all of these definitions to define a Julia set pically. Okay. So indeed let me write it this way. our number field together with any absolute value that we choose. So for all any absolute value remember this was the collection of absolute values we do have an isometric embedding of our field with this absolute value into a field which is algebraically closed and complete. Okay. and and the topology coming from the the viatic topology, the induced topology from this absolute value. Okay, so that's the good news, right? Because if we're talking about periodic points, we definitely need algebraic extensions, right? To solve to find roots of polomials. And if we're talking about closed sets, we definitely want to work somewhere that's complete. The bad news is that this is topologically very bad. It's totally disconnected. Okay, so everything is closed and um so what do we do to get around that? Well, I'm not going to tell you in depth because it takes like its own lecture. But there is a way around this to make sensible definitions of Julia sets a sensible non-archimedian Montel's theorem and so on. And that is by enlarging the space CP and weakening the topology by embedding it in what's known as the Burkovich projected line. Okay, so I'm not even going to write anything. Just know that there is a solution to this issue of what is a Julius piatically. Okay, I'm going to dodge that for this talk by working with escape rate functions. Okay, because escape rate functions only need absolute values, right? So recall in the complex setting if f is a rational map of degree d greater than equal to 2. Let's say we write f as f_sub_1 over f_sub_2. Um uh let me not do that. Let me use that for the homogeneous and say f equals f_sub_1 f_sub_2 some homogeneous lift of f to a2 which is to say that I wrote [snorts] f as say g over h and then took these two polinomials and homogenized them. Okay, that's my f1 and f_sub_2. So that I get two polomials of degree d in two variables homogeneous which provides a map from a2 to a2 uh sorry b2 to c2 no reason for the ace. Um then the homogeneous escape rate associated to this lift is say g subf of xy which is the limit as n approaches infinity of um what do I want to Say here I've got my f. Did I take max? Yeah. Well, I did I write the degree? Yeah, I did. Okay, sorry. Of 1 /d to the n log fn of xy where this norm can be any norm that you like on this finite dimensional vector space, right? So, might as well take max of coordinates or something like that. Okay. All right. So, this definition we're familiar with. So this is say a max of um x chord y chord. I don't want to give the coordinates themselves names. Okay. The point is that this definition genuinely only uses the absolute value to define the escape rate function. Right? And the fact that it converges only comes down to the triangle inequality. And so there's absolutely no reason why we can't say well actually oh I already got my red. Why not take a place I didn't leave myself space here. Say I've got some place of a number field. Assume that f is has its coefficients in a number field. Okay. And then I can take the viatic escape rate with respect to this absolute value V that I've chosen simply by putting little V's on my absolute value. Those are V's, not Y's. Okay. So I get this infinite collection of escape rate functions, right? And any time I take a point here. So now notice that in order for this to make sense, this will only be defined when X and Y have coordinates in K. Okay? Or actually these absolute values always extend up to the algebraic closure. Well, as you can sort of tell here, so it's okay for them to live in the algebraic closure of K, which is the set of algebraic numbers itself. So as long as I take points with algebraic coordinates right then in fact I have a well- definfined value of this lifted homogeneous escape rate function biatically. Okay. All right. So let me make some comments on properties then almost everything you want is still true with with one caveat. So first of all, notice that it is still the case just by definition that um for this lift f if I want to apply log to the image of a point vatically this is still going to be within a bounded constant of d * the log of the norm of the point. Okay, this notation by the way means that the difference of these two things have absolute value um bounded by a constant independent of P. Okay, and it's also the case by definition here ah sorry let me add a little V to my G. It's also the case that G transforms exactly with respect to F, which is to say that GF V of XY uh sorry, let me put it this way of F of P is equal to D * G FV of a point P. Okay, by the limiting construction, we made some choices. So we started with a rational map. When we evaluate the escape rate of a point, we actually take two lifts, right? We lift the map. We could have multiplied both of these by a constant to get a different lift, right? And we lift the point. And again, we could have multiplied by a constant to get a different lift of the point. And so how does the escape rate transform under those two lifts? It's exactly the same as in the complex setting. So G FV of CP is G FV of P plus log of CV and G say CF. So if I modified my lift by multiplying both terms by a constant of P, then this is the same thing as the unmodified escape rate function plus log CV over D minus one. Okay. And finally I want to note this is not just about this escape rate. This is a fundamental difference between somehow non-archchimedian dynamics and archimedian dynamics. Even though this is an infinite set of absolute values for all but finitely many of them, the dynamics are actually non-expanding viatically. Okay. And one can in fact show that for all but finitely many V this escape rate function now let's put it this way P is in fact log of norm of P on the nose. Okay, this case is known as good reduction for the for the absolute value v. Okay. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; And the last formula here. &gt;&gt; Log. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Sorry. I'm like there's no g. [laughter] Yeah. OG. Good. All right. Any other questions? I know we're going a bit quickly. No. All right. So, the point is that the machinery of the escape rate function goes through. That's the point. And in fact, it's even better than that, right? So, thanks to the product formula, we can make the following definition, the product formula and this final comment. So I know this is definitely not a survey talk but I thought it would somehow be more useful to prepare you guys for the a couple of the mini courses next week. So hopefully well I am surveying a couple of results but all right so what is the point here? And the point is that even though we've done this for one absolute value at a time, okay, the product formula tells me that there must be some sense in which these things glue together meaningfully. Okay, and so we make the following definition and I want to say it slightly carefully. So, okay, a number field um a rational map with coefficients in K of degree D at least two. Um then the canonical height associated to F is a function um usually denoted by say like h of f I'll write it this way from the algebraic points of the reman sphere. So that's all the algebraic numbers plus infinity um defined by The canonical height of P is the sum over all places in K. That's the defining number field of my rational map of again I need a normalization here just like in the product formula. And this is for any choice of lifts. Let's say let's say this way choice of lifts uh f of f and p t tilda of p. Okay. So in practice of course you could just like take p comma one pretty much all the time unless you're dealing with infinity. If you want to know the canonical height of infinity you'll have to do something else. But the point here is that this is well defined, right? First of all, for all but finitely many places, there's in fact no contribution to this sum. Okay. Second of all, right, think in terms of think of imagine that P had integer coefficients, right? To say that in fact this has a viatic absolute value which is different than one means that that prime that you're taking the viatic absolute value for appears in the in the denominator of one of the coefficients. Right? Sorry I guess I said in rational coefficients. Right? That only happens for finitely many primes. Right? So whatever your coordinates are right this will take a value other than one at only finitely many places. And so this green's function, this escape rate function is zero away from finitely many places. The second thing is that this is totally independent of either choice of lift. And the reason why is the product formula, right? So the terms I pick up if I change the lift when I sum over the normalization, that's just log of the product formula, right? And the product formula told me that the product over all places was one and so the log of it is zero. So it's independent of choice of lift for either the map or the point. So this is a nice well- definfined function. And it inherits dynamically substantial properties from those of the local escape rate functions. Okay. So key properties. All right. So the first is that the transformation property that we might hope for. So if we apply f to a point then the canonical height multiplies by d the degree of the map. The second one is that this canonical height is always non- negative. Okay. That's maybe not it's not quite quite free except for the fact that you could always choose a lift of your point so that the absolute values are greater than or equal to one. Right? The third point is that this canonical height is within a bounded constant of what's known as the naive height which is simply what you get if you use these basic log functions. Okay. So this is the height which is defined to be the sum. Okay. This is both archimedian and non-archchimedian places. We've come over here. Right. This by the way in fact is the dynamical height function is the canonical height function associated to the powering map Z to the D. Okay. But so the value of the canonical height and the value of this so-called naive height, they always differ in absolute value by some constant again independent of P. This notation is telling me. And this leads us to the key point at least you'll recognize from question one which is that the canonical height of a point is zero if and only if that point is preeriodic. Okay. So this direction is clear right? So if we have a pre-periodic point, it's got to be algebraic, right? Because it satisfies a polomial relationship with an iterative f and the coefficients of f live in a number field which are themselves so are algebraic. So it's an algebraic point. So it makes sense to talk about the canonical height at that point. But of course by definition here I mean the escape rate function is coming from a limiting process, right? And so if I've got a point which is periodic or pre-periodic either way then in fact the growth of the escape rate function will not be exponential and we'll take the value zero at all places. Okay. All right. The other direction requires a theorem of substance. Okay. But I will tell you with words. So the thing is if I have a point with canonical height zero then all of its iterates have canonical height zero too by this transformation property that means all of its iterates have an constant upper bound on the height right so there's some uniform constant for which all elements of the orbit of the point have height no larger than that and by which I mean naive height okay but it's a theorem due to Northcot that in any single number field you have only finitely many points of bounded height. Okay, so the input here is what's known as Northcot's theorem which says that any number field has only finitely many has finitely many points less than or equal to some constant bound. Okay. And so the orbit of P then lives in a finite set. So P is pre-periodic. All right. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Depends on. &gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely. So just to sort of put you in the world a little bit, like if it's Z square plus C, this is something like um log of C, like log of modulus of C. Uh I guess it would be since I'm taking the global object, this would be like height of C actually. Yeah. Okay. All right. And one more thing that I should say because it's the way that people usually introduce the height. I want it on the same board. So, I'm going to sort of do bad board here. Um, five, which is that with this tool of the naive height, there's somehow like a a more general or more basic way to write this, which is that the canonical height of a point is nothing more than the limit. This is really bad board work. sorry [laughter] of uh the height of the iterates of the point properly scaled. Okay. So if I look at the height of the iterates they should be growing like d to the n. Okay. And taking that scaling into account this limit always exists and it is equal to the canonical height. The reason I didn't present it this way to you is that the power really comes from the local decomposition here when you're working in the arithmetic setting. Okay, that's where you do the real work. This formula while very clean and maybe helps you understand uh this even better, right, is somehow not as useful. Okay. All right. So, let's go back to our questions then. I have 10 minutes each. Sorry. Let's go back to your questions. Any questions? Yes. &gt;&gt; That's right. So if P is not preperiodic, there must be some absolute value for which it's escaping. That's right. Because if not, all of the local escape rates would be zero. So that's a really nice point actually to make because somehow even though you could prove for with this formula what you've just said is a much more meaningful statement right having escaping dynamics is something we can actually use all right good and it's worth saying also I mean okay I'm not I can't tell you all of arithmetic dynamics in one hour but of course like a major field of study and open question is how small can this number be if it's not zero right if you have a point That's that's not preeriodic. What kind of lower bound can you get on its canonical height? Okay. That's known as the dynamical lamer question. All right. Okay. And now I feel like Okay. &gt;&gt; [laughter] &gt;&gt; I'm going to go on a tangent here, but I want to I want to say that uh if that question sounds interesting to you, there is a very beautiful paper of Philip Hobgger and Harry Schmidt dealing with the dynamical layer question and it's in a very limited setting, but it's very beautiful because it very much mimics vessel Deitrov's proof of the Shinsel Austin conjecture, which is a purely number theoretic thing and it's it's potential theoretic and very nice. All right. So let's go to the first question about common pre-periodic points for maps which are not which do not share the complete same preeriodic locus which yes indeed does impose relations between the maps although in the non-polomial case they're slightly messy to write down. So question one. So each of these questions has a main arithmetic tool that I can now describe to you with the language of height functions. Okay. And question ones is actually sort of the like more unpleasant one to write down. So bear with me for a moment. So this is a case of a very broad class of theorems known as arithmetic equidistribution theorems about which I am sure you will hear quite a bit more from meto mraki and I think peters is also going to talk about some transcendental generalizations of these things. Okay [snorts] so let me give you a case of an arithmetic equidistribution theorem that we can get our hands on. Okay so first let me give a little notation. So given say an algebraic number x um what do I want to say here? So suppose f is the rational map of degree d at least two with coefficients in a number field. So defined over a number field k as before. Let x be an algebraic number that is it satisfies some polomial with coefficients in Q. Okay, but that implies it satisfies some polinomial with coefficients in K. And we can choose the minimal such in terms of degree. So the gala orbit of x over k is a set of roots of the minimal polomial and kt satisfied by x. Okay. So again if you're sort of algebraically happy with the galwa theory of algebraic number fields this is just hitting the x with the absolute galwa group. Okay, so the gala orbit of x [snorts] but you can also think of it as okay I've got an algebraic number it satisfies some polomial with coefficients in k because it satisfies some polinomial with coefficient it's the root of rather some polinomial with coefficients in q and so therefore some polinomial coefficients in k since q is a sub field of k right but I can possibly factor that polomial until I get the minimal one which has up to a constant which has x as a root all right then the arithmetic Equid distribution theorem says the following. [snorts] So suppose that I have an infinite sequence again these are say it this way is a sequence of distinct algebraic numbers which have the property that their canonical height goes to zero as n goes to infinity. Okay, this is what people refer to as small in this setting. So small points meaning that it's a sequence. I don't want them to all be like the same periodic number which is why I've imposed distinctness um with canonical heights going to zero. So what should you think of? Well, by the transformation rule, this could be say the set of pre-im images of some particular point, right? When I take a pre-image, right, then my canonical height is multiplied by one overd, right? We move it over to the other side. If we're taking a pre-image here, and so if I take successive pre-im images of a single point, then the canonical heights of those successive pre-im images will go to zero, right? So pre images of a single point or any set of pre-periodic points. Okay, so that's what you should have in your head. Then the gowa orbit, I guess I didn't give this notation. Let's say GN of the XN that orbits equidistribute to a natural measure to a canonical measure. So which is to say that if I take one over the size of the orbit and then weight with delta masses every element of the orbit that they converge in the weak star topology to some measure [laughter] mu of FV viatically and this is for each prime or for each absolute value on the number field Okay, let me close this up. Sorry, it's hard to see. Uh oh. Okay, I think I've written down everything correctly here. So, okay, let's let's think in the complex world, right? We know what pre-image is equidistribute to, right? If you take a p point which is non-exceptional for your rational map meaning it has an infinite set of pre-im images and you start looking at exactly the measure which is delta mass supported on this collection of pre-im images and pull back pull back pull back the limiting measure is the measure of maximal entropy on the Julia set right and so we can also write this since I've been doing sorry I just cannot reach the top board I've been doing this all in the language of escape rate functions So perhaps the nice sort of way to write this is say this way okay that this is a distributional applause of the escape rate function the local escape rate function since this is also true in the complex setting I haven't told you what this means in the viatic setting don't worry about it okay it's easier if that helps um but so the point is that this is the usual measure of maximal entropy. So totally invariant measure of maximum entropy uh for v Archimedian and kind of a mess of v is nonarchimedian so might not even be supported on cp if he is nonarchdian. Okay. So again, I can't really get into it so in so much depth without talking about the Burkovich projected line, which I don't want to do. But the point is that if I have a sequence of small points, right? So including these particular examples that we're used to, then in fact the geometry of those points for any choice of topology relevant to this number field, right? So for any viatic norm the geometry of the points is constrained by the support of a natural measure. Right? So in the archimedian setting this is saying say for example if I have two rational maps and they have loads of preeriodic points in common right the same will be true for the galwa orbits of those preeriodic points that means that the two measures of maximal entropy must be almost the same. Okay. And this is indeed one approach to that question one. &gt;&gt; Yeah, please. &gt;&gt; It doesn't. It doesn't actually. I mean, so the V comes into play in the notion of convergence, of course, because I'm saying that they're viatically close like the integrals that I'm evaluating the weak star convergence at. I'm taking like the the v the integrals are happening over these Burkovich lines that I haven't told you about. So, so it's sort of embedded into the notation of the weak star convergence and also the place where these measures live depends on V. So, changes as V changes. Um, but there's no like V assumption on the points themselves I think is what I wanted to point out and answer to your question. &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; What's that? &gt;&gt; It's hidden in the weak star and also in this notation, right? So mu of FV this measure this viatic measure of maximal entropy which it is indeed a viatic measure of maximal entropy. Um not only is it sort of living on this this larger space that I haven't told you about it might have support that doesn't intersect your number field or the algebraic numbers at all. In fact, that's the usual case. That good reduction case where I told you that um the the escape rate function is just the log, right? Then this measure is supported on a point of that larger space which is not one of these sort of classical points. Okay? It's not an algebraic number. It's a point which corresponds to the unit dis. Okay. All right. Other questions? Okay, so big hammer and this is not even close to the most general and high-tech version of this equidistribution theorem that's in place. I should make some attributions here. Sorry. So the various versions of this equidistribution theorem were due to a lot of people. Um I should mention um Chuier and Shambberlar and Yuan and Jeang and uh Baker and Rumli and probably that's enough names that no one will be angry at me if they watch this. Okay. All right. So, let's discuss then. I've pretty much verbally outlined the approach to question one. Let me just write one sentence and then move on to question two because I'm running out of time. All right. So then approach to question one and this was the approach that my co-authors and I took. It's not exactly the approach of of DeMarco Mavrai and um other people who have made progress on this question though they all approaches on this question go through an equidistribution of this kind. Um but the approach is if these are large then muf and mufg are very close at every place. And this can be made quantitative um by a a theorem of um Charles Fav and Juan Rivera Latellia and um using a particular sort of sum of energy pairings at each place which really measures for you the proximity of these two measures. Okay? So you can cook up a number which is small if and only if the two measures are almost the same or if you prefer to think of it in the Archimedian setting the two Julio sets are really close together. Okay. And given this then so in for example a one parameter family. So if f and g are in a one parameter family of rational maps this implies that the two parameters that give us f and g say f is you know uh h of t1 and g is h of t2 if you like that t1 minus t2 is small for all V. So for every absolute value, those two parameters must be close. Okay, this is a little bit of [laughter] a lot going on under the surface here. But of course, the product formula obstructs this, right? So contradicting the product formula &gt;&gt; of degree D defined over a number field. As long as they have algebraic coefficients, you can always choose a large enough number field to to have both of them defined over that. Yeah. Um contradicting the product formula. Okay. And this is the situation. So the cases that I did with my co-authors were one parameter family cases. We did quadratic polinomials and lates maps of a certain type. Leandre um Mavrai Schmidt completed the one parameter family setting um though not in quite the same way that we did. And the interesting thing about this is that one of the outputs of this procedure is a kind of not a product formula per se, but like a repulsion formula for Julia sets or if you prefer measures, right? That for two rational maps, the measures of maximum entropy, unless they coincide at all places, unless the two pre-eriodic sets are the same, somehow they cannot be too similar at all places. So you you detect a dynamical difference somewhere when you're in the arithmetic setting. And before I move to question two, I'll comment that okay, all of this is pretending that the rational maps have algebraic coefficients. Why can I do that? There's actually a relatively straightforward specialization argument. Okay, which I won't I won't outline but um but reducing to the algebraic case from the complex case in this setting is actually pretty easy. All right, so with my remaining two minutes and then Jasmine told me I could go over. So sorry guys. Um [laughter] 2 plus epsilon. Uh let me give you the main arithmetic theorem. So the takeaway I want you to have from these from this talk is these two arithmetic theorems. Okay in your toolkit. Okay I'm about to tell you the second one because everything in arithmetic dynamics comes down to these two arithmetic theorems. Equid distribution or what I'm about to write down which is Schmidz subspace theorem. Okay. So the arithmetic theorem here is known as the Schmidt subspace theorem. It's due to Schmidt from the 70s and it is a theorem about how well algebraic numbers can approximate other algebraic numbers. Okay? But I will not write it in that form. I will write it in a slightly more basic form here. So let's let say L1 through ln be linearly independent linear forms in n variables and let's assume that they have coefficients in a number field Okay. All right. That's down. Sorry. Then for every epsilon greater than zero, the set of integer vectors uh yeah, I'll write it this way. Um integer vectors not all zero coordinates um such that L1 of X up to ln of X this product has absolute value or modulus if you like since I'm in a number field less than or equal to the norm of the integer vector to the minus epsilon so This set is contained in a finite union of proper linear subspaces of QN. Okay. So, all right. What what am I telling you? Let me give you a special case which you might have heard which is Roth's theorem. Actually probably everybody meets Ross theorem in one-dimensional dynamics when we talk about like zagal discs and approximation of r by rational numbers. Maybe not but let me tell you Ross theorem since it's one of the more useful special cases of schmidt subspace. So for example, if I take n= 2. I take my first linear form say an x and y just to be y. And I take my second linear form to be say alphay minus x where alpha is some algebraic number so that I satisfy the conditions of the schmidt subspace theorem. Then this says for all x sorry uh the set of say xy in z 2 minus the origin such that the product of y and alphay - x is less than 1 / norm of xy to the epsilon. So for all epsilon greater than zero is in a finite union of well linear subspaces which are proper inside of the two-dimensional space are lines. Okay. But if I think of XY as the lift of a rational number right so i.e the set of rational numbers say P over Q such that alpha is well approximated by P over Q in the following sense is finite. Okay. So what is the translation here? I'm taking a rational number P over Q. I lift it to PQ here, right? Satisfying this inequality turns out to be almost up to a constant equivalent to satisfying this inequality because if I'm close to alpha, then the difference between the side the absolute value of P and the absolute value of Q is bounded. And so this height is comparable to either absolute value of P or absolute value of Q. Okay, so just imagine in your head you're replacing this with absolute value of Q. Maybe say that's the larger of them. And then I've just divided both sides of this inequality by y^2 or q ^2 down here. Okay, so this is Ross theorem. So this is about the quality of approximation of this algebraic number alpha by rational numbers p over q and the finite union of lines here of course I mean it's it's a union of lines through zero sorry I should say through zero since a linear subspace that gives me exactly finitely many rational numbers down here okay and I'm well over time so let me just say a word so question two was about how orbits intersect finitely generated subgroups Okay, the point is that Schmidt subspace theorem doesn't just hold for the usual absolute value. Schmidt subspace theorem also has versions where you use this for viatic or piic absolute values. Okay? And in fact, you can put lots of them together at once and get very strong defontine approximation statements known as sunit theorems. And so the answer to question two, the best known answer which is due to Jason Bell and his co-authors Chen and Hussein uh whoops is that the way an orbit can intersect a finitely generated subgroup is in a finite union of arithmetic progressions for the indices plus a set of density zero with some kind of natural notion of density bon density if you're familiar. Okay, so think about that example I told you earlier. If we just take like the Z plus one map and powers of two, right? The indices of that map which hit the finitely generated subgroup are exactly I guess powers of two minus one or whatever if you start with the starting point one. So it's an exponentially growing set of indices. That's a very thin set of integers. Okay. And their result is that okay, maybe you have some arithmetic progressions in there which can happen just as we talked about in the periodic point case. But once you throw all those arithmetic progressions away, what you're left with is a very thin set um of your orbit hitting the finitely generated subgroup. And it goes through this machinery and its generalizations and a lot of other things. So, okay, with apologies for the extra six minutes, I'll stop there. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Yes. Sorry. Yeah. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So in the end of question two part you said that it's easy to produce from the general case like general Russian country to one for &gt;&gt; that's right that's right &gt;&gt; what &gt;&gt; so the point is that somehow if there's any pair which has more than like B+ one you know you you produce some bound B for algebraic ones right but then the point is that if there's any pair with non-algebraic coefficients which realizes more preperiodic points that's really like a function field statement because your coefficients are are are transcendental and I can't tell the difference between like the transcendental pi and the transcendental e in the algebraic setting and so the point is that if you have if you produce this bound B for algebraic pairs and Then you have some non-algebraic pair f and g which have b+1 common preeriodic points. There must exist actually an algebraic specialization where instead of taking pi you say oops I meant pi to be actually square root of two that produces b plus one common preeriodic points. So so from the algebraic perspective there's no difference between the complex number pi and the transcendental number like t like variable t. And so anytime you violate this once you have the algebraic bound, violating it for a transcendental pair implies that you have a violation for an algebraic pair. Yeah. So it's really a function field argument. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Asa like average over the order and you put the direct. So if you like greater than you get divergence to something that's obviously not a measurable max that has its own &gt;&gt; you might so certainly you could make a soft statement and say I'm living in a compact set like there's some subsequential limits what can I say about the set of subsequential limits I mean maybe let me go to the side for one second before I ask answer more I mean we think of the example in the complex setting of like the powering map right the pre-periodic points are the roots of unity You can't just take like some roots of unity and get equidistribution to league on the circle, right? You could always take the root of unity closest to one for example and that would definitely not give you distribution to league on the circle. So for example, that would correspond to giving everything a weight zero except for one of the roots of unity. And so from that perspective, if you allow your weights to really vary freely between zero and one, you can get basically any measure that you want in just talking about this Z squared case supported on the unit circle, right? But I am sure that there are particular waitings that would be more dynamically meaningful for which there would be some interesting answer to your question, but I don't think they're covered by any of the equidistribution theory. And the reason why is that well so behind all of this really this this measure is a is a curvature form arising from a metricized line bundle that's living on top of our space. And so one could imagine like maybe waiting the line bundle itself and then you would get a natural curvature form associated to that and maybe that would somehow see weightings on the points but I don't know about that. Yeah it's a good question. I saw another hand somewhere. Yeah Julia. So can you again get like an integral that relates like and &gt;&gt; yeah absolutely I mean like if you're in the polomial setting for example this would just be integrating one of the escape rate functions against the other one's measure of maximal entropy right and so this energy pair sorry locally and so then summing up that integral over all places yeah so yeah happy to so like idea of the energy uh you can think of it in a couple of ways. So this is roughly I'm I'm yeah uh so like in the polomial setting this could be something like integrating I'll sort of write the the small greens function. So I've taken my lift but then I've pushed it back down. It's the polomial setting so I have like a well- definfined escape rate anyways. uh GF f1 of zed or sorry f of zed against uh mu g of zed. This would be the local contribution to the escape rate. And so uh so at each place so gfv mu g sorry sorry I know I'm overloading the the letter g here but so what you want to imagine what so let's think in the complex setting why is this energy pairing telling me how close the two measures are I mean the escape rate function for f is small when you're close to the julius set out of f the measured for g is supported when you're on the Julia set of G right and so this pairing will be small precisely when most of the Julia set of G takes a small escape rate value for F i.e Most of the Julia set of G is close to the Julia set of F and vice versa. Okay, does that help clarify? &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; this is roughly the local contribution to the energy integral, which is to say that the energy integral, sorry, the energy is is roughly speaking a sum over places properly normalized of the viatic versions of these things. And so that statement &gt;&gt; then you can say that &gt;&gt; that's right. So when the energy is small so this thing is always non- negative if you properly normalize it and um meaning choose a a non- negative choice of your your escape rate function here. Um and so if these contributions are always non- negative then this energy is small if and only if every single local contribution is small which means that every single pair of Julia sets is viatically close together for every single V which was the violation of the product formula. Yeah. And sorry I couldn't give more an idea of Q2 but okay. [laughter] That's right. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Thanks, guys.
