Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                               № 3/2025
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                         F ive ways to spell ADE


                                       Dani Kaufman



       The solutions to a surprising number of mathemati-
       cal questions can be classified by the ADE Coxeter–
       Dynkin diagrams. This snapshot will show you a
       selection of these questions and how they correspond
       to the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams.

1 I n t roduction

Sometimes, mathematicians find that several seemingly different problems can
be tackled with the same basic calculations and considerations. Often this
suggests a hidden connection between these problems, which may not be so
clear from the onset. In this snapshot, I want to show you some of the many
questions that can be answered using the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams.



                 An :                        Dn :



             E6 :                           E7 :


                            E8 :
                    F i g u r e 1 : The ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams.




                                            1
    The ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams are graphs, that is, mathematical objects
consisting of points, called vertices, and edges connecting these vertices (see
Figure 1). They were introduced independently by H. S. M. Coxeter (1907–2003)
[1] and E. Dynkin (1924–2014) [3]. Both Coxeter and Dynkin were brilliant
mathematicians, the former regarded as one of the greatest geometers of the 20th
century, while the latter left a profound mark on both algebra and probability.
Quite surprisingly, ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams arose while Coxeter and
Dynkin were working on two seemingly unrelated problems. This intriguing
“coincidence” already hints to their profound importance.
    Although there are infinitely many ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams, they
can be divided into three “families”. There are two infinite families of diagrams,
the An , n ≥ 1 and Dn , n ≥ 4 diagrams, and one exceptional family with three
diagrams, E6 , E7 , E8 . These three families are illustrated in Figure 1. The
subscript indicates the total number of vertices in the graph. So, the An diagram
is simply a chain of n vertices, and the Dn diagram is a chain with a fork at
the end with n vertices in total.


2 A war m-up example

Let us illustrate the use of these diagrams with the following problem:
Question 1 Which are the triples of positive integers (p, q, r), with p ≥ q ≥ r,
that satisfy p1 + 1q + 1r > 1?

   With a little bit of trial and error (try it yourself!), you can find that the
solutions are
                         
                         (p, q, 1),
                                                           p, q ∈ N;
              (p, q, r) = (p, 2, 2),                        p ∈ N;
                         
                           (3, 3, 2), (4, 3, 2), (5, 3, 2).
                         

   Notice that these solutions have a familiar structure: two infinite families
shown on the first two lines and then three special solutions that do not follow
any of these patterns. The triples above can be related to ADE diagrams by
the following procedure:
1.   Start with a graph with one vertex and no edges.
2.   Then, add three chains of vertices of lengths p, q, r from this vertex. The
     length of the chain is counted including the starting vertex. This way, a
     chain of length n adds n − 1 new vertices.
   Following this procedure, you will get the An diagram for the triple (p, q, 1)
with p + q = n + 1, the Dn diagram for the triple (n − 2, 2, 2) and the E6 , E7 , E8


                                         2
                                                  2
                                                          3                                                                          4
     (3, 3, 2) ↔ E6 :                                                          (4, 2, 1) ↔ A5 :
                                  3                                                                              2

       Fig u r e 2 : Two examples of the correspondence related to Question 1.


diagrams for the triples (3, 3, 2), (4, 3, 2), (5, 3, 2). Try this yourself, or take a
look at the examples in Figure 2.
   Now for a more exciting example! It is related to graph labelling. What is
that? If we take a graph and put a label, such as a distinct number or name,
on every vertex, we call this naming scheme a graph labelling.
Question 2 Which connected graphs have a labelling by positive integers such
that twice the label at each vertex is equal to the sum of the labels at connected
vertices?
   The answer to this question is not given by the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin
diagrams as shown above, but instead by a variation of them, the affine ADE
Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams. These affine ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams are
shown, along with the labelling that solves Question 2, in Figure 3.

                                      1
                                                                                     1                                           1

              A
              fn :                                                        D
                                                                          fn :
                      1       1                   1           1                              2   2               2       2
                                      1                                              1                                           1

                                      2                                                                      2

           E
           f6 :                                                       E
                                                                      f7 :
                  1       2       3           2           1                      1       2       3       4           3       2           1
                                                                      3

                              E
                              f8 :
                                          2           4           6        5         4       3       2       1


      Fig u r e 3 : The affine ADE diagrams. Each diagram has n + 1 vertices.

   Now, let us pause and introduce another graph-related concept. The degree
of a given vertex is the number of edges that connect to this vertex. Equipped
with this knowledge, we can argue for the following correspondence between
connected graphs and affine ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams:

1.    The graph has a cycle                                                                      ↔       A
                                                                                                         fn
2.    The graph has a vertex of degree 4 or more                                                 ↔       D4
                                                                                                         f


                                                                           3
3.   The graph has two or more degree-3 vertices        ↔    D
                                                             fn ,   n>4
4.   The graph has exactly one degree-3 vertex          ↔    E
                                                             fn

In each of these cases, we can see that the considered graph contains the
indicated affine ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagram as a subgraph. But the affine
diagrams already satisfy the labelling problem, in an essentially unique way,
and it is not possible to add any more vertices to the graph. Thus, the graph
we are considering must actually be an affine ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagram.
   The affine ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams actually correspond to the regular
ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagrams in a simple way: just remove one of the vertices
that has been labelled with “1” and you find the corresponding regular diagram.


3 Kaleidoscopes

The next example is related to a question about abstract symmetry. In order
to make this question more concrete, we will phrase it using a popular toy – a
kaleidoscope.
    From a mathematical perspective, a kaleidoscope is simply an arrangement of
mirrors in space. Every mirror is an infinite flat plane which reflects everything
on one side of it to the other. A kaleidoscope creates a reflection pattern by the
following procedure:

1. Choose a mirror and call it M .
2. Reflect all the other mirrors about the chosen mirror M .
3. Add new mirrors where the reflections of M land, unless there is already a
   mirror in that position.
4. Repeat this procedure with a new mirror, until no more mirrors can be
   added. Note that it is possible that this procedure will never stop.




(a) Initial kaleidoscope with ( b ) Reflecting m2 over m1 ( c ) Reflecting m1 and m2
     two mirrors: m1 , m2 .     creates a new mirror m̃2 .   over m̃2 completes the
                                                             reflection pattern.

         F i g u r e 4 : Generation of a reflection pattern from two mirrors.


                                          4
   This procedure simulates the way the mirrors reflect light. If we were to
look into a real-world kaleidoscope, we would actually see the reflection pattern
described above. The usual toy kaleidoscope is made with three mirrors arranged
so that they form an equilateral triangular prism. This generates the well-known
kaleidoscope reflection pattern (see Figure 5).




 (a) An image from a toy kaleidoscope.                  ( b ) The reflection pattern overlaid.

Figure 5 : A kaleidoscope reflection pattern. The initial three mirrors are shown
                in white, and the new reflected mirrors in yellow.


3.1 Fin i t e r e f l e c t i o n p a t t e r n s

In this section, we explain the solution to the following question that fascinated
Coxeter:
Question 3 Which kaleidoscopes produce a reflection pattern with finitely many
reflections?
   To get us started, consider the situation with two parallel mirrors. This
arrangement already produces infinitely many reflections. Just imagine yourself
in a barber shop with two mirrors on opposite walls! Thus, if we want to have
only finitely many reflections, all of our mirrors must intersect each other. In
other words, no two mirrors are parallel.
   Next, we consider arrangements with two intersecting mirrors. In order to
get finitely many reflections, we find that the angle between the mirrors must
be a rational   multiple of 180◦. In fact, two mirrors intersecting at the angle
   q·180◦
of p , with pq written in lowest terms, produces the same reflection pattern
                                               ◦
as two mirrors intersecting at an angle of 180p . Figure 4 is an example ◦of this –
the final reflection pattern has all mirrors intersecting at angles of 180
                                                                        5 .
   Now we consider three mirrors. There are two cases to consider, either the
third mirror intersects the line where the other two mirrors meet, or it does


                                                    5
not. By the previous argument, we can consider the situation where the three
                                                      ◦
                                                        180◦ 180◦
mirrors intersect pairwise with angles ( 180       p , q , r ), with (p, q, r) all being
integers bigger than 1.
    If the third mirror does not intersect the line where the first two meet,
then our three mirrors form a tube. By slicing this tube perpendicularly, we
find a triangle in the plane with angles (180◦/p, 180◦/q, 180◦/r). By the usual
angle sum formula for a triangle we have 180◦/p + 180◦/q + 180◦/r = 180◦ so
1/p + 1/q + 1/r = 1. There are only three triples (p, q, r) which satisfy this,
(3, 3, 3), (4, 4, 2), (6, 3, 2) 1 , and in each case the reflection pattern eventually
produces two parallel mirrors and thus is not finite. The reflection pattern from
Figure 5 corresponds to the (3, 3, 3) triple.
    Now, let us consider the case where all three mirrors meet at a single point. If
we were to draw a sphere around this point, we would find that the three mirrors
cut out a triangle on the sphere. Since the sum of angles of a spherical triangle
is strictly greater than that of a planar triangle, we see that 1/p + 1/q + 1/r > 1.
By the solution to Question 1, we know that the only possible solutions are
(p, q, r) = (n, 2, 2) or (3, 3, 2), (4, 3, 2), (5, 3, 2). We can now see that there will
be finitely many reflections corresponding to a tiling of the sphere by triangles
in each case. These cases correspond to the D and E families of diagrams.
    The final step brings us back to the beginning of this section: The ADE
classification is completed by noticing that the An diagrams correspond to two
mirrors meeting at an angle of 180◦/n.


3.2 H i g h e r d i m e n s i o n s

Coxeter also considered arrangements of mirrors in higher dimensions, that is,
higher than 3. In this case, a mirror denotes a (n − 1)-dimensional subspace,
which reflects objects from its one side to the other. For the sake of simplicity,
we restrict to the case where the mirrors all intersect one another at angles
of 90◦ or 60◦.

Question 4 Which kaleidoscopes, consisting of mirrors intersecting at angles
of 90◦ or 60◦, generate a finite reflection pattern in any dimension?

   To answer this question, we use a graph to encode the kaleidoscope. Place one
vertex for each mirror and connect them with an edge if the mirrors intersect at
an angle of 60◦ and no edge otherwise. Coxeter proved that such an arrangement
produces a finite reflection pattern if and only if the associated graph is an
ADE Coxeter–Dynkin diagram.

1   These three triples correspond to the E
                                          f6 , E
                                               f7 , E
                                                    f8 affine diagrams!


                                               6
   It is interesting that the same diagrams address two very similar problems
in different ways. For example, in three dimensions, the arrangement with
three mirrors intersecting at angles (60◦, 60◦, 90◦) corresponds through the first
classification to the triple (3, 3, 2), which corresponds to E6 , but through the
second classification to the A3 diagram.


4 S i ngular ities

Singularity theory is part of a very rich area of mathematics called algebraic
geometry, and we will find yet another ADE classification within it.
   We consider two-dimensional surfaces in three-dimensional space. Such a
surface is called smooth at a point if it looks like a single sheet of paper around
that point. If a point is not smooth, it is called singular.


4.1 An i n t r o d u c t o r y ex a m p l e

As an example, let us consider the function F (x, y, z) = x2 + y 2 − z 2 . We
define the surface X as the set of all triples (x, y, z) that satisfy the equation
F (x, y, z) = 0. In this case, X is a cone that has one singular point at the origin,
see Figure 6a. We can study this singularity by constructing a resolution of it.
Roughly speaking, a resolution is a smooth surface Y with a map r : Y → X
which is one-to-one away from the singularity.
   A possible resolution for our surface X is given by the hyperboloid Y shown
in Figure 6b, defined by the equation x2 +y 2 −z 2 = 1, with the map r “squishing”
the circle x2 + y 2 = 1, z = 0 to the origin, and being the identity map away
from the origin.




                (a) The surface X.                         ( b ) The surface Y .

                           F i g u r e 6 : Blowing-up the singularity.




                                               7
4.2 B l ow i n g - u p

The operation of taking a surface with a singularity and replacing the singular
point with a circle while keeping the surface unchanged everywhere else is called
blowing-up. The new circle which appears when a blow-up is performed is called
a vanishing cycle.
    A blow-up does not have to always produce a smooth surface! The new
surface might have singularities itself, which in turn can be resolved by doing
more blow-ups. We are interested in the singularities which can be resolved by
a finite number of blow-ups, but to find an ADE classification, we must simplify
our question a bit.


Question 5 Let P (x, y) be some polynomial in x and y. What surfaces of the
form P (x, y) − z 2 = 0 give rise to a singularity at the origin that can be resolved
with a finite sequence of blow-ups?

    These singularities are (again) parameterised by the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin
diagrams! A proof of this is a bit too technical for us to give here, but we can
at least show how the diagrams appear.
    The sequence of blow-ups produces a diagram as follows: First, look at the
collection of vanishing cycles in the resolution which are produced by each
blow-up. Then, make a graph with one vertex for each vanishing cycle and
connect these vertices with edges if the vanishing cycles intersect. This graph
must be an ADE diagram. Our first example produces the A1 diagram, as there
is only one vanishing cycle.
    Table 1 shows a representative function for singular surfaces of each singularity
type and its corresponding diagram. The D4 singularity, its resolution and the
graph of its vanishing cycles is shown in Figure 7. These pictures were retrieved
from https://singsurf.org/parade/ADE.php, a lovely website where you can
view many singularities and their resolutions.

                          ADE Type           Function
                            An            xn+1 + y 2 − z 2
                            Dn           xn−1 − xy 2 − z 2
                            E6             x4 + y 3 − z 2
                            E7            x3 − xy 3 − z 2
                            E8             x5 + y 3 − z 2

Tabl e 1 : Representative functions for singular surfaces of each singularity type.




                                         8
    (a) Surface defined by              ( b ) Resolution of (a)   ( c ) Vanishing cycles and
       x3 − xy 2 − z 2 = 0.                 by four blow-ups.       their intersection graph.

                       F i g u r e 7 : D4 singularity and its resolution.



   Note that there are many different functions which can have effectively the
same singularities, and therefore they will correspond to the same diagram.
For example, the table lists x3 − xy 2 − z 2 as the function for the D4 diagram.
Through a change of variables, it is possible to see that the function x3 + y 3 − z 2
has the same D4 singularity.



4.3 A s e c o n d c o r r e s p o n d e n c e ?

We can find yet another ADE correspondence in the previous list of functions
and their singularities. Let us ask the following question:

Question 6 Which surfaces of the form xp + y q − z r = 0 have an ADE singu-
larity at the origin?

   Using Table 1 and the discussion about the D4 singularity in the previous
section, we can see that the triples (p, q, r) that satisfy xp + y q − z r = 0 are
exactly those that satisfy 1/p + 1/q + 1/r > 1. So, the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin
diagrams also parameterise these surfaces!
   Table 2 shows these functions, the ADE type of the triple (p, q, r), and the
ADE type of the singularity. We can notice that the singularity type in the
classification by resolving the singularity is different than the classification of
the triple (p, q, r). Can you find a way of relating these two classifications? For
example, how is the E6 diagram related to the D4 diagram? 2

2   Hint: look back at Figure 3 and look at the subgraph where all labels are bigger than 1.


                                                  9
                    Triple type           Function          Singularity type
                        An              xp + y q − z 1        Nonsingular
                        Dn             xn−2 + y 2 − z 2          An−3
                        E6              x3 + y 3 − z 2            D4
                        E7              x4 + y 3 − z 2            E6
                        E8              x5 + y 3 − z 2            E8

       Ta bl e 2 : (p, q, r) triple types, their functions, and singularity types.


5 Cluster algebras

The last example of an ADE classification I will describe is the classification
of finite cluster algebras. Cluster algebras were introduced by S. Fomin and
A. Zelevinski (1953–2013) in [4] and have since found applications in many other
areas of mathematics and physics.

5.1 Q u i ve r s a n d mu t a t i o n s

In order to tell you what a cluster algebra is, we need to know about quivers
and their mutations. A quiver is simply a directed graph, that is, a graph
where each edge is given a direction. We call directed edges “arrows” between
the vertices and, for our convenience, we number the vertices of a quiver by
1, 2, . . . , n. We use the notation (i → j) to represent an arrow between vertices i
and j. Moreover, we will assume that the quivers have neither arrows from
a vertex to itself nor “2-cycles”, that is, pairs of arrows from vertex a to vertex b
and the other way around.
    Given a quiver Q, we can mutate Q at vertex k to produce a new quiver,
µk (Q) using the following procedure:

1. For every pair of arrows (i → k), (k → j), add an arrow from vertex i to
   vertex j. If this creates a 2-cycle between vertex i and vertex j, we remove
   it.
2. Reverse every arrow incident to k.

     An example of a quiver mutation is shown in Figure 8.

                        3                                                3

              1                    2                             1                2

                  (a) A quiver.                           ( b ) After mutation at vertex 1.

                            F i g u r e 8 : A quiver and its mutation.


                                                10
   You can play with quivers and mutations using B. Keller’s java applet, located
here: https://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~bernhard.keller/quivermutation/


5.2 Se e d s a n d ex c h a n g e s

To generate a cluster algebra, we start with an initial seed, which is a quiver
with n vertices with the variables x1 , x2 , . . . , xn placed on its vertices. Next,
we can pick a variable to exchange. The exchange makes a new seed by the
following rule:
                                                           !
1. Replace xk with x′k = x1
                                      Q            Q                  Q
                           k
                                            xi +         xj , where         xi is the product of
                                      i→k          k→j                i→k
     all xi such that there is an arrow from vertex i to vertex k.
2.   Mutate the quiver at vertex k.

   From this new seed, we can pick another variable to exchange and repeat
the process. If we exchange at the same vertex two times in a row, we will get
back the original seed. Notice that the same exchanges can lead to different
outcomes, depending on the order they are applied. We call the variables that
appear on each new seed the cluster variables, and the collection of cluster
variables appearing on the same seed a cluster. A cluster algebra is generated
from an initial seed by doing all the possible exchanges, writing down the new
cluster variables and their clusters as we go.


5.3 Ex a m p l e s

An initial seed and a few exchanges are shown in Figure 9. Try doing a few
more exchanges yourself! This seed will produce infinitely many new seeds and
cluster variables.

                                                                 (x2 )3 +x3 +x1 (x2 )2
                                               x3                        x1 x3
              x3

                              (x2 )3 +x3                              (x2 )3 +x3
     x1                 x2        x1                       x2              x             x2

          (a) A seed.        ( b ) After exchanging at x1 . ( c ) After exchanging at x3 .

                         F i g u r e 9 : A seed and two exchanges.




                                               11
                                              y+1
                                                      
                                               x ←y
                                      µ1                  µ2

                                                           y+1  y+1+x
                                                                        
                             x→y                            x →   xy
                                                                    µ1
                                                           x+1  y+1+x
                                                                        
                             y←x                            y ←   xy

                                      µ1                  µ2
                                              x+1
                                                      
                                               y →x


                     F i g u r e 1 0 : The A2 cluster algebra computation.


   The full calculation of another simple example is shown in Figure 10. The
initial seed with variables x, y is shown on the left-hand side. After five exchanges,
we find that, miraculously, we have returned to the original seed once again.
Therefore, there are five different clusters and five different cluster variables,
namely:
                                  y+1 y+1+x x+1
                            x, y,       ,          ,      .
                                     x      xy         y

5.4 F i n i t e C l u s t e r A l g e b ras

The question we conclude with is:
Question 7 Which cluster algebras have finitely many clusters and cluster
variables?
   The answer to this question is (of course) given by the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin
diagrams. S. Fomin and A. Zelevinsky proved in [5] that a cluster algebra has
finitely many clusters if and only if it has a seed whose underlying quiver is
an directed version of an ADE diagram. The example shown in Figure 10 has
finitely many clusters and corresponds to the A2 diagram, and we call this
example the A2 cluster algebra.
   As a hint of some of the phenomena that can happen in finite cluster algebras,
consider the following seed:
                                         x1


            x8            x7             x6       x5           x4        x3   x2

This seed is a directed version of the E8 diagram, so there will be finitely many
cluster variables, and we call it the E8 cluster algebra. If you list them all (there


                                                  12
are 128 of them in 25080 clusters!), there will be one variable which has the
highest exponents in the denominator. This variable is of the form
                                               P
                                                                 ,
                                 x31 x22 x33 x44 x55 x66 x47 x28

where P is a polynomial in x1 , . . . , x8 . Compare the exponents in this denomina-
tor with the labelling in Figure 3. All other cluster variables will have exponents
in the denominator strictly smaller; the same effect can be already noticed in
the A2 cluster algebra. In a way, the existence of the labelling of the affine
diagrams implies that there will be finitely many cluster variables.


6 Q u estions, connections, and conclusions

Once we see that these different questions all lead to the ADE Coxeter–Dynkin
diagrams we should really ask ourselves and wonder:

• Why do the ADE diagrams classify so many different things?
• What exactly is the connection between the things they classify?
• Is there some uniform way to describe all the structures captured by the
  ADE diagrams?
To me, it seems that these relationships and connections are actually the most
interesting part of this discussion.
   The curious reader should look at [7] to find some current work on the
connection between cluster algebras and singularity theory; to McKay’s corre-
spondence [6], a beautiful realisation of the connection between graph labelings
and kaleidoscopes; or to Du Val’s paper [2] which outlines the relationship
between the simple singularities and symmetry groups related to kaleidoscopes.
   I often get a feeling that different ADE classifications are actually just
glimpses of different sides of the same bigger “ADE” structure. The difficulty in
identifying the nature of this structure lies in the fact that all of our classifications
and connections are found in some case-by-case or seemingly coincidental way.
Maybe someone will someday construct some mathematical object or theory
which simultaneously implies all the ADE classifications at once. Until then,
we will just have to accept that we simply live in a world full of happy ADE
coincidences.




                                               13
I m age credits

Figu r e 5 “Kaleidoscope” by Hide-sp, CC BY-SA 3.0, via Wikimedia Commons.

Figu r e 7 Rich Morris, singsurf.org, CC BY-NC-SA 4.0,
        available at http://singsurf.org/parade/ADE.php.


R e ferences

[1] H. S. M. Coxeter, The complete enumeration of finite groups of the form
                 kij
    Ri2 = Ri Rj       = 1., Journal of the London Mathematical Society 10
    (1935), 21–25.
[2] P. du Val, On isolated singularities of surfaces which do not affect the
    conditions of adjunction. II., Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical
    Society 30 (1934), 460–465.
[3] E. Dynkin, Classification of the simple Lie groups, Matematicheskiı̆ Sbornik,
    Novaya Seriya 18 (1946), 347–352.
[4] S. Fomin and A. Zelevinsky, Cluster algebras. I: Foundations, Journal of
    the American Mathematical Society 15 (2002), no. 2, 497–529.
[5]         , Cluster algebras. II: Finite type classification, Inventiones Mathe-
      maticae 154 (2003), no. 1, 63–121.
[6] D. Ford and J. McKay, Representations and Coxeter graphs, The geometric
    vein: The Coxeter Festschrift (1982), 549-554.

[7] B. T. Jensen, A. D. King, and X. Su, A categorification of Grassmannian
    cluster algebras, Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (Third
    Series) 113 (2016), no. 2, 185–212.




                                        14
Dani Ka u f m a n i s a r e s e arch group leader     Connection s t o o t he r f i e l d s
at the M a x P l a n ck I n s t i t ute for           Reflections o n M a t he m a t i c s
Mathem a t i c s i n t h e S c i e nces in Leipzig.
                                                      License
She wro t e t h i s s n a p s h o t while she was a   Creative Co m m o n s B Y- NC - S A 4 . 0
postdoc t o ra l r e s e a r c h e r in pure
mathem a t i c s a t t h e U n i versity of           DOI
Copenh a g e n .                                      10.14760/S N A P - 2 0 2 5 - 0 0 3 - E N

Mathem a t i c a l s u b j e c t s
Algebra a n d N u m b e r T h eor y, Geometr y
and Top o l o g y




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junior E d i t o r                                    Mathematis c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Oliver N a g y                                        Oberwolfac h g G m b H
junior- e d i t o r s @ m f o. d e                    Schwarzwa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                      77709 Obe r wo l f a c h
Senior E d i t o r                                    Ger many
Anja Ra n d e cke r
senior- e d i t o r @ m f o. d e                      Director
                                                      Gerhard Hu i s ke n
