At the dawn of the 20th century, the 
mathematician David Hilbert presented a   23-problem roadmap for the future of mathematics. 
His sixth problem was among the most ambitious:   to mathematically prove the laws of physics. 
It was a tall order, but Hilbert offered a   starting point. Physicists model the behavior 
of gases using different sets of equations.   The challenge was to prove that these 
equations describe the same reality,   just seen through different lenses.
For 125 years, mathematicians struggled with   the problem. This year, three researchers devised 
a proof that finally connects these equations at   long timescales. It’s one of the most significant 
advances in mathematical physics in decades. At the microscopic scale, physicists model 
gas particles as tiny billiard balls that   follow Newton’s laws of motion.
Zoom out to the mesoscopic scale,   where the Boltzmann equation describes how groups 
of particles are likely to behave over time.  Zoom out again to the macroscopic 
level, where you study the behavior of   the entire gas as a single substance 
using the Navier-Stokes equations.  Mathematicians had already proved that a 
mesoscopic description of a gas gives rise   to a macroscopic one in various settings, 
like for a dilute gas sealed inside a box. But proving the microscopic-to-mesoscopic 
connection was vastly harder. To do this,   researchers would have to show that 
if they started with Newton’s laws   and increased the number of particles 
in their gas to infinity, then their   description of the gas’s likely behavior 
would converge to the Boltzmann equation.  The hardest part is dealing with particle 
collisions. In a gas where every particle   follows Newton’s laws, the vast number of 
possible collisions introduces huge headaches. You're talking about a very large number of 
particles – a number of particles that in the   limit goes to infinity. So those collision 
histories are very, very, very complicated.  Each collision history can be turned 
into a diagram. Mathematically,   this is a graph with nodes that mark 
the moments when particles collide,   and lines that show how the particles 
move between those collisions. Those diagrams record the collision histories, 
like saying that particle one collided with   particle two, and before that it collided with 
particle three. We want to give estimates on the   probability of such collision histories, which 
are probabilities of those very huge graphs.  In 1975, Oscar Lanford showed that the infinite 
sum of those collision patterns does give rise   to Boltzmann’s equation – but only for extremely 
short time intervals. Beyond that tiny window,   the number of possible collision diagrams 
explodes, and the whole method collapses. There are big challenges that one encounters 
if one wants to go to long times, which was   something that has never been done before.
The main obstacle was recollisions:   scenarios where the same particles 
run into each other more than once. To show that the infinite sum behaves like 
the Boltzmann equation, mathematicians have   to show that collision patterns involving 
lots of recollisions are vanishingly rare. Lanford showed this for very short time 
periods. But as time goes on and particles   have more chances to recollide, 
this gets much harder to prove. This is the dangerous mathematical issue 
which has to be tackled in order to prove   the validity of the convergence for a long time.
And so the mathematicians Yu Deng, Zaher Hani   and Xiao Ma set out to tame the explosion of 
diagrams that made the problem intractable. What is really causing this divergence? 
We were zooming for hours, going to bed   thinking about it, waking up, thinking 
about it. It required such intense work. The team developed an innovative mathematical   algorithm to break enormous collision diagrams 
into smaller pieces that are easier to study. The algorithm is really about how to break a 
very big diagram – a very complicated collision   history – into some small pieces that are 
so simple that we can compute by hand.  Then came the breakthrough: the mathematicians 
realized that they didn’t need to follow every   possible collision history. Instead, they 
learned to focus only on the well-behaved ones. This was the flip of the switch that made 
me believe that we can get to longer times.  Now, with a manageable number of diagrams, 
the team could show that collision patterns   with lots of recollisions are extremely 
unlikely, even over longer time scales. So it turned out that [these] recollisions were 
actually not important. They can be neglected.  In March 2025, the team posted their 
result, showing that Newton’s microscopic   equations converge to Boltzmann’s 
mesoscopic equation over long times. We were able to show that indeed as you take the 
limit of the number of particles going to infinity   and the diameter of the particle is going to zero, 
this density does satisfy Boltzmann's equation.  Their work finally completes the solution to 
Hilbert’s Sixth problem – a milestone more than   a century in the making. Mathematicians 
are excited about what comes next. Going to long times – this was well understood as 
not the end point of the research in this field,   but rather that it was somewhat of a bottleneck 
that we needed to overcome in order to access   even more interesting questions that lie ahead.
Going forward, mathematicians could try to   use the new techniques to study 
gases in more realistic settings. There are many settings that we had to impose 
on ourselves in order to achieve this. So what   happens for a gas that is not as dilute? 
What happens to a gas of particles that   are not exactly colliding with each other 
like hard spheres? What if I use the laws   of quantum mechanics instead of Newton's 
laws as my fundamental law of physics?  So all those are questions that are 
still very open. It is very exciting   that we are in this period where we can start 
talking seriously about the next challenges. Imagine a surface that curves 
like a saddle at every point,   causing parallel lines to diverge. 
Defying geometric intuition,   it twists and folds so wildly that it can’t live 
in ordinary space. This is a hyperbolic surface. You can't realize these surfaces 
in three dimensions, but you can   realize them abstractly, and they are the 
building blocks of a lot of mathematics.  The mathematician Maryam Mirzakhani 
developed tools to explore the strange   geometry of hyperbolic surfaces. 
But when she died in 2017,   at just 40 years old, her quest to illuminate 
these unimaginable shapes was left unfinished. She was a super-superstar. You immediately 
recognize her genius just talking to her.  Now, mathematicians Nalini Anantharaman and Laura 
Monk have advanced Mirzakhani’s pioneering work,   proving a landmark result with deep 
implications for mathematics and physics. So hyperbolic surfaces are quite enigmatic 
things. We can’t really draw them very well.  The plane is flat and the sphere is 
positively curved. And, to the contrary,   hyperbolic surfaces – they’re negatively curved.  And so as opposed to the sphere, there's 
more directions to explore. So if you have   a little character here and it's walking 
on this plane, there's actually a lot of   different directions it can go to. The space 
is actually growing very, very fast around it.  To understand hyperbolic surfaces, 
mathematicians study closed   geodesics – paths that follow the shortest 
route and loop back to their starting point. The search for such closed geodesics or what are 
called periodic orbits has always been central in   the study of mechanics and the study of geometry.
In her 2004 Ph.D. thesis, Mirzakhani derived a   formula estimating how many closed 
geodesics a hyperbolic surface has   up to a given length, offering a hint 
of its overall geometric structure. She started to ask questions that 
are very natural, like if you take   a random surface, does it have some property?
Mathematicians are interested in how connected   a hyperbolic surface is – a property measured by a 
number between 0 and 1/4 called the spectral gap. A large spectral gap means the surface is well 
connected, with many paths linking its regions. A small gap means it’s poorly 
connected and harder to move across. So, what we wanted to do is to compute the 
spectral gap of a typical hyperbolic surface.   So take a very big bag and put all of them 
in the bag, take a surface, and wonder, what   does it look like? There's a magic number, one 
quarter, which is the best possible spectral gap,   and what we wanted to show is that most surfaces 
have a spectral gap of almost one quarter. So   it means they are as connected as possible.
Anantharaman and Monk hoped to prove this by   building on Mirzakhani’s formula to get 
a more accurate estimate of geodesics. What struck me when I started reading 
her works is how beautiful it was.  But they soon encountered a problem:   Some surfaces have very tangled geodesics that 
wind around the same region for a long time. When these rare geodesics crop up, they appear in 
such large numbers that they distort calculations   of the spectral gap. Because of this, attempts to 
prove the maximum spectral gap stalled at 3/16ths.  Tangles – they make life very difficult for 
you to push through from 3/16 to a quarter.  They completely blow up the average and make 
it completely impossible to do our technique.  So we need to remove them. I want to 
take my big bag and I want to remove   those surfaces which I don't like from the bag. 
But all the tools we have – we're not really   allowed to take an average on some of the bag.
We were manipulating very complicated formulas   of hyperbolic trigonometry, and I remember that 
early 2022 we thought that we should give up.  For inspiration, the researchers 
turned to mathematician Joel Friedman,   who in 2002 proved a landmark 
result about the spectral gap in   random graphs – networks with points and edges 
that are connected according to probability. His proof was very long. I don't know how many   people even studied his proof 
because it was so complicated.  Friedman showed that most random graphs have the 
largest possible spectral gap. This means they   are expanders — networks that stay highly 
connected even with relatively few edges. Everywhere you turn, algorithms 
are based on expanders.  Buried in the middle of Friedman’s paper was a key 
mathematical tool, the Möbius inversion formula,   which he used to extract information about 
the average spectral gap of expanders. We really understood that what we were 
trying to do was similar to what he did.  By adapting Friedman’s formula, Monk and 
Anantharaman were able to filter out tangled   geodesics to compute the average spectral gap 
across all hyperbolic surfaces. They showed   that almost all hyperbolic surfaces 
have a spectral gap of one-quarter,   meaning they are as connected 
as mathematically possible. Mathematicians hope to use the new work to 
answer questions in number theory and dynamics,   including about how quantum systems create chaos. The thinking is that hyperbolic surfaces 
are very good toy models. You have your   model – it’s too complicated. Well, 
let's think about something that's   simpler and see what we can do there. Quantum 
chaos is a very, very complicated topic. But   hyperbolic surfaces have a lot of things going 
on for them. There's a lot of algebraic tools.  That's an area that I think will be 
impacted tremendously in the next few years.  Myriam Mirzakhani – I think she would 
have been very excited. Seeing how big   the field has become over the last few years 
would have made her very happy, doubtless. In 1917, Japanese mathematician Sōichi 
Kakeya asked a deceptively simple question:   If you rotate an infinitely thin needle 
through all possible directions, what’s   the smallest region it can sweep out?
This playful geometric puzzle grew   into the Kakeya conjecture, one of the most 
influential problems in modern mathematics. Today, the conjecture sits at the base of a 
towering set of ideas in harmonic analysis,   the study of the mathematics of signals and waves. Everything's resting on this 
Kakeya conjecture. If that's wrong,   then the whole tower of implications kind 
of collapses, right? Everything fails.  For decades, higher-dimensional cases of the 
Kakeya conjecture eluded the world’s greatest   mathematical minds. But in early 2025, two 
researchers published a once-in-a-century proof. In harmonic analysis, this is probably the 
biggest development in at least 20 years.  In the early 20th century, 
Abram Besicovitch stunned   mathematicians by showing that 
in the plane, you can rotate a   needle through every direction while 
remaining inside a set of zero area. Roughly speaking, what Besicovitch found was 
that if you take a million-point U-turn – if   you do a ridiculous number of back and 
forths – you can make the area used as   small as possible. So that was unintuitive.
These complex objects, called Kakeya sets,   aren’t “large” in any ordinary sense. To 
understand their true size, mathematicians   had to look beyond area and study how 
they fill space in fractal dimensions.  In the 1970s, the mathematician Roy Davies proved   that every Kakeya set, no matter how thin, 
still has a full fractal dimension of 2. That revelation inspired the Kakeya conjecture,   a bold claim that in every dimension, these 
bizarre sets somehow fill the whole space. These Kakeya sets can have small areas,   but they have to be full-dimensional 
objects. They can never be kind of   compressed into a lower-dimensional space.
While this statement may seem simple,   mathematicians struggled to 
prove it in higher dimensions. The family of different directions 
in three dimensions is much richer   and much more complicated. And as a 
consequence of this, there's a lot of   phenomena that occur in three dimensions that 
you don't really see at all in two dimensions.  In his 2D proof, Davies thickened 
needles into little rectangles and   studied their intersections. In 3D, 
you get extremely thin tubes instead. And in the Kakeya conjecture, what you're 
trying to prove – what it really boils down   to – is showing that if you have a collection of 
tubes pointing in different directions, then they   can’t intersect very much. You have to consider 
all possible ways you can arrange these needles   in different regions. And there's an infinite 
number, basically, of all these configurations.   And you want to show that every single one of 
these has to occupy a large amount of space. Around the same time Davies published his 2D 
result, Charles Fefferman published a surprising   proof that connected the Kakeya conjecture to the 
Fourier transform, a powerful tool from the field   of harmonic analysis that allows mathematicians 
to study complicated signals or functions. It was a fundamental new connection. 
It became increasingly clear that the   path forward to solving questions in 
analysis was to understand geometry. The Kakeya conjecture was no longer geometric 
curiosity. Suddenly, it was foundational to   a hierarchy of major conjectures about how the 
Fourier transform behaves in higher dimensions. So it became increasingly important to 
understand the Kakeya conjecture because   it’s part of a whole family of really 
difficult conjectures in many fields. For decades, mathematicians worked on the Kakeya 
conjecture in 3 dimensions, but progress was slow. People were stuck for a long time. 
I spent many years working on this   problem. And we had some partial results, but 
we were missing big chunks of the program.  Then, in 2022, Hong Wang and Joshua Zahl 
joined the effort. Their first target was   a special family of Kakeya sets called 
sticky sets, where tubes pointing in the   same direction stay close together in space. 
This structure made the sets easier to study. In 2022, Wang and Zahl proved the 3D 
Kakeya conjecture for sticky sets. That was really strong evidence that 
they were closing in on the goal. The harder challenge was the non-sticky case,   where sets exhibit an irregular geometry, 
with tubes scattered in all directions. A clue came from mathematician Larry Guth. He 
showed that any counterexample to the Kakeya   conjecture in 3D would have to be grainy, or 
full of tiny regions where many tubes overlap. We spent quite a bit of time trying to understand 
how these grains interact with each other. Graininess gave Wang and Zahl the structure 
they needed. They showed that no point in space   can lie in too many grains, limiting 
how efficiently tubes can overlap,   and preventing the set from compressing 
into a smaller-dimensional object.  They could use this argument to show that no 
3D Kakeya set can have a dimension below 2.5   for example. Then, they expanded their proof 
with an argument called induction on scales. There has been this dream for a 
while to prove this conjecture   about what's called induction on scales.
It's a way to get from A to B, when A and B are   very far apart, by just little steps.
Previous attempts to prove the Kakeya   conjecture with the induction on scales 
had resulted in inefficiencies and losses. A classic example is the game Chinese 
Whispers, where you get a lot of people   in a row and someone whispers a sentence to the 
next person who whispers a sentence to the next   person. If they had perfect reproduction, then 
by induction, the person at the end would have   exactly the same sentence as what they started 
with. But if you only have even a tiny amount   of loss in each transition step, then the end 
result can be worthless – or at least hilarious.  Wang and Zahl figured out that graininess 
was the key to controlling these losses. And so you can slightly increase, 
with each time you run this argument,   your best estimate on the dimension of sets 
until eventually you get all the way up to three.  At each step, Wang and Zahl improved the lower 
bound on the dimension of any Kakeya set. Then,   in early 2025, they completed the proof: Every 
Kakeya set in 3D has a fractal dimension 3. You really try hard to not let yourself 
get carried away by the excitement.  Mathematicians are hopeful that they 
can use the result to help build up   proofs of the more ambitious conjectures above it. So it's now given us a lot more confidence 
that all these beautiful conjectures we   have – that they're going to hopefully be true.
People are just going to start climbing this   hierarchy. And I think one by one, 
these other conjectures are going   to either be solved completely or you 
will see a lot of dramatic progress.