

Dante and the 3-Sphere | Azimuth

 

Azimuth

Home
About

 

Dante and the 3-Sphere

Apparently Dante conceived of the universe as a 
3-sphere
!  That’s a 3-dimensional space formed by taking two solid 3-dimensional balls and completely gluing their surfaces together.

In his 
Divine Comedy
, Dante describes the usual geocentric universe of his day.  It has concentric spheres for the Moon and Sun, the various planets, and then the so-called ‘fixed stars’.  Outside the sphere of fixed stars, there’s a sphere for the ‘first mover’, the 
Primum Mobile
.  Ptolemy believed in this, and so did Copernicus—and even Galileo did, at first.

But that’s not all!  Outside that sphere, Dante describes 9 concentric spheres of the Empyrean, where various levels of angel live.  And as we go up into the Empyrean, these spheres get 
smaller
.  They all surround a point—which is God.  This is shown above in an 
illustration
 by Gustav Doré.

At the opposite extreme, at the center of the Earth, is another point — and that’s where Satan lives, surrounded by the 9 levels of Hell.

Altogether we have a 3-dimensional closed universe of the sort mathematicians call a 3-sphere!  You can also think of it as the one-point compactification of 3d Euclidean space with God as the point at infinity and Satan at the farthest point from that: the origin.

Much later Einstein also postulated that the universe was a 3-sphere, which was kept from collapsing by the cosmological constant.  This was before Hubble and others saw that the universe is expanding.  General relativity also allows space to be a 3-sphere that expands with time and then recollapses in a Big Crunch, but that model doesn’t seem to fit the data very well.

Here are a couple of good references on this subject:

• Mark A. Peterson, 
Dante and the 3-sphere
, 
American Journal of Physics
 
47
 (1979), 1031–1035.

• Matthew Blair, 
Points and Spheres: Cosmological Innovation in Dante’s Divine Comedy
, Senior Thesis, Baylor University, 2015.

Let me quote the first:

In the Paradiso Dante describes his ascent sphere by sphere through the Aristotelian universe to the Primum Mobile. Beyond this is the Empyrean, the abode of God and the angels. The conventional picture of the Empyrean seems to have been rather vague, geometrically speaking. In diagrams of the universe, for example, it was represented by the border area, outside the Primum Mobile, often richly populated with angelic beings. Dante, however, endows the Empyrean with a detailed and precise geometric structure.  This structure is described in Canto 28, as if seen from the Primum Mobile, as a bright Point representing God, surrounded by nine concentric spheres representing the various angelic orders. The details which follow leave the almost inescapable impression that he conceives of these nine angelic spheres as forming one hemisphere of the entire universe and the usual Aristotelian universe up to the Primum Mobile as the other hemisphere, while he is standing more or less on the equator between them [….]  Taken all together, then, his universe is a 3-sphere.

[….]

Dante himself believed he was expressing something entirely new at this juncture.

[….]

Dante’s elation with this idea—a feeling we may readily share — has traditionally left readers somewhat puzzled.  That is just another way of saying that if this passage is not taken as a description of the organization of 2-spheres into a 3-sphere, then it is hard to see what the point of it is.

Related

					This entry was posted  on Sunday, January 18th, 2026 at 2:10 am and is filed under 
astronomy
, 
history
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the 
RSS 2.0
 feed.
											You can 
leave a response
, or 
trackback
 from your own site.
					
					

Post navigation

« Previous Post

Next Post »

9 Responses to 
Dante and the 3-Sphere

 
Justin
 
says:
 

19 January, 2026 at 7:56 pm
 

Primum Mobile as a descriptive term still kind of lives on in the term “prime mover” that is still sometimes used for the diesel engine within diesel locomotives: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prime_mover_(locomotive)
 .

(The railroad industry and the HVAC industry are, IMHO, the two very last worldwide bastions of totally ancient, antique, obfuscated technological terms! — e.g., the quite significant remaining usage of BTUs and the Rankine temperature scale in the latter. :)

Reply

 
John Baez
 
says:
 

19 January, 2026 at 8:02 pm
 

Wow, I didn’t know that locomotives (wonderful word that) have prime movers, nor that anyone uses Rankine, which I remember learning about but never used.  I guess if you’re committed to thermodynamics and also Fahrenheit you need Rankine.

Reply

 
David Roberts
 
says:
 

21 January, 2026 at 2:26 am
 

I’m pretty sure I learned the term ‘prime mover’ when growing up for the vehicle at Wikipedia’s page 
Tractor unit
. Haven’t heard it for a while though.

Reply

 
Colin
 
says:
 

21 January, 2026 at 8:02 am
 

It is worth being clear that Dante was writing poetry, so did not intend every detail as literal physical cosmology. Even still, I do love Peterson’s analysis of the end product, in terms of modern geometry.

Reply

 
D.Corradetti
 
says:
 

24 January, 2026 at 4:27 pm
 

Dear John,

You might also want to cite Florensky Pavel, Mnimosti v geometrii – Imaginary Numbers in Geometry (1922) who was the first to propose using non-Euclidean geometry to interpret Dante’s Divine Comedy. The essay was written on the occasion of the 600th anniversary of Dante’s death.

Reply

 
D.Corradetti
 
says:
 

24 January, 2026 at 4:27 pm
 

Dear John,

You might also want to cite Florensky Pavel, Mnimosti v geometrii – Imaginary Numbers in Geometry (1922) who was the first to propose using non-Euclidean geometry to interpret Dante’s Divine Comedy. The essay was written on the occasion of the 600th anniversary of Dante’s death.

Reply

 
John Baez
 
says:
 

24 January, 2026 at 11:38 pm
 

That sounds interesting.  I wonder what imaginary numbers have to do with it!

Reply

 
D.Corradetti
 
says:
 

25 January, 2026 at 8:41 am
 

I have the italian translation in front of me. Essentially Florensky critiques the Argand plane as a visualization of complex numbers and instead invokes a two-sheeted Riemann surface; in this view, multiplying by “i” corresponds to moving between orthogonal sheets. then notices that the classic substitution R-> iR that maps spherical to hyperbolic trigonometric relations (e.g.: cos to cosh and sin to sinh), so that the imaginary unit is bridge to negative-curvature metrics.

Than uses imaginary time “ict” and links complex analysis to pseudo-Euclidean (Minkowskian) geometry, framing imaginaries as coordinates of physically (and ontologically) non-Euclidean domains. When Dante goes to Lucifer and then appears back at the top che sees it as a geometrical discontinuity as change of sheet. He’s main point is both a mathematical and theological point over the use of imaginary numbers to model spiritual states of consciousness.

Reply

 
Orwin O'Dowd
 
says:
 

17 February, 2026 at 3:39 pm
 

Johann Lambert raised the possibility of a sphere with imaginary radius in correspondence with Kant. Where Kant took time as his touchstone in realism, and thought space purely subjective, Lambert took the converse view, and proposed the imaginary sphere to accommodate Kant’s queries.

Lambert, meanwhile was pioneering hyperbolic trigonometry, for use in locating comets, whence his vis viva equation, giving velocity squared in a Kepler orbit. There the time of the comet, of momentous significance to many, gives way to the unchanging pure geometry, the Platonic eternity.

Now noting the salience of Platonism in Dante’s world, I rather think he had the sensible world of experience as our imagining *within the encompassing reality of God’s creation. I’m now engrossed in the classical geometry of triangles, where the inscribed circle goes it’s own way, diverging from the other centers as symmetries break, like a monad of subjectivity.

Meanwhile, ancient mathematics passed into harmonics, notably in Ptolemy. And lives on through Fourier analysis and string theory. Now one can say your minimal comma poses a mass gap or hierarchy problem, or explains it. At the expense of projecting familiar harmonic ranges to quite godlike energies.

Does harmonics settle on a pentatonic foundation within five dimensions, or are more required? Or are we not in range of answering such questions, as Kant warned?

Reply

You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it. 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
 
Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*
 
Name 
*
 

Email 
*
 

Website
 

 

 
Notify me of new comments via email.
 
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ

 

latest posts:

Octonions and the Standard Model

Interview with Micah Zarin

Summing the Reciprocals of Primes

From Pentagons to Pentagrams

The Great Icosahedron

What Are Atoms Made Of?

Phasons in Quasicrystals

Naturally Occurring Quasicrystals

Freiman’s Constant

Quantum Mechanics of the Inverse Cube Force Law

latest comments:

allenknutson on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
allenknutson on 
Octonions and the Standard…
BLK on 
Norton’s Dome
walgaterobert on 
Octonions and the Standard…
Phillip Helbig on 
Octonions and the Standard…
mitchellporter on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
walgaterobert on 
Octonions and the Standard…
 

How To Write Math Here:

You can 
include math in your comments using LaTeX
,  but you need to do it this way:

$latex  E = mc^2$

You need the word 'latex' right after the first dollar sign, and it needs a space after it.  Double dollar signs don't work, and other limitations apply, some described 
here
.  You can't preview comments here, but I'm happy to fix errors.

Read Posts On:

art
 (8)

astronomy
 (59)

azimuth
 (65)

biodiversity
 (41)

biology
 (114)

carbon emissions
 (80)

chemistry
 (92)

climate
 (162)

computer science
 (80)

conferences
 (113)

culture
 (8)

economics
 (33)

energy
 (51)

engineering
 (12)

epidemiology
 (22)

game theory
 (30)

geography
 (5)

health
 (7)

history
 (21)

information and entropy
 (100)

jobs
 (17)

journals
 (5)

mathematics
 (653)

music
 (55)

networks
 (192)

oceans
 (13)

physics
 (270)

politics
 (2)

probability
 (99)

psychology
 (6)

publishing
 (20)

puzzles
 (14)

quantum technologies
 (28)

questions
 (3)

risks
 (59)

seminars
 (23)

software
 (33)

strategies
 (44)

sustainability
 (76)

the practice of science
 (29)

this week's finds
 (18)

also visit these:

Bit Tooth Energy

Brave New Climate

Do the Math

Dot Earth

Environment 360

Planet3.0

RealClimate

Serendipity

The Science of Doom

Yale Environment 360

RSS feeds:

 
RSS - Posts
 
RSS - Comments

Email Subscription:

Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.

						Email Address:					

 

 

						Sign me up!					

					Join 5,451 other subscribers				

SEARCH:

Search

Blog Stats:

5,558,995 hits

Blog at WordPress.com.

 
Comment						

Reblog

Subscribe

Subscribed

				Azimuth			

Join 5,451 other subscribers

 

												Sign me up											

											Already have a WordPress.com account? 
Log in now.
 

 
Privacy						

 

				Azimuth			

Subscribe

Subscribed

Sign up

Log in

Copy shortlink

										Report this content									

										View post in Reader									

Manage subscriptions

Collapse this bar

Loading Comments...

Write a Comment...

Email (Required)

Name (Required)

Website

 

