Let's hit record. We are recording. Going to put hide floating controls. Okay. All right, everyone. It's a pleasure to introduce Professor Apur Vakar here to be giving [snorts] this this very nice basic notion seminar. Welcome everyone that is online. Uh the title is polymath 14 from word games to an analysis definition of obedient groups. Paul is yours. &gt;&gt; Thank you so much again to Emanuel and of course to ICTP. So uh yeah so I looked up online and it says that the basic notion seminar you have to explain a basic notion. So my basic notion is a groups which is probably as basic as you know you would start in in actual math like math degree. So but the as the other part of the title suggests I will tell you about something different about this basic notion the fact that you can define it using analysis right. So this is not something you see in a math degree if you will. So this is all based on joint work which is now of course published uh with five other authors and there were inputs from many many other people. So this is as much uh the story of a theorem as the story itself. the story of how the theorem was proven. Okay, why is this now not clear? Okay, so I will start more broadly from from the broader sciences and uh since we are in ICTP of course there is no the broader sciences are definitely well represented here and studied and there is a fundamental difference between theoretical or mathematics and the broader sciences. They are very highly collaborative. So this is one example of uh one of the most famous uh modern breakthroughs in science, the genome project or the human genome. There is similarly the particle physics at the small scale uh the Higs boson which had 3,000 authors. It says the same thing with previous Yeah, this is crazy. Well, part of it is the Atlas collaboration which you can imagine is just a ton of people together. uh this is the paper where they announced it. Uh on the large scale in physics there is gravitational waves which also got in the well. Uh and this is the paper itself. There are 100 and more more than 100 institutions more than 800 authors. Okay. And then there is uh so okay so there are all these things from you know from the broader sciences. Mathematics of course is very theoretical and we don't really do such level such scale projects. uh and there is one uh there was one recent thing that uh started uh that was an initiative and that's what I will tell you about so but it started out and still goes on with you know the since we are in Oilers I should have mentioned oiler as well maybe but yes all these people were sort of doing research by themselves Newton did not know what linen was doing and vice versa and so on Ramanujan of course in India very famously was doing research alone until he wrote to Hardy Uh Andrew Wilds worked secretly three decades ago uh to prove FLT. Two decades ago, Perilman worked by himself. One decade ago, Ethan Jang worked by himself. Uh and so these are all these sort of individuals sitting in isolation with pen and paper kind of stories. Now they can sit in isolation with AI of course. So but today I will tell you about a modern collaboration mechanism called the polymath project. And this is an attempt to sort of involve many more people than just two or three into solving a problem. And I was involved in one of these problems and it helped answer this basic question about groups. Okay. So uh again this is sort of created with a broader audience in mind that groups are you know groups what are groups? Groups are really symmetries. Of course as as a math audience we understand that a group is something that acts on a set and so when it acts on a set it means there is a homorphism from groups into the automorphism group. So into the symmetries of the set. It fixes the set as a whole and it just permutes things inside that entire set. Right? The rotation keeps the circle the same but changes the position of every point in the circle. Right? And there are of course groups show up all over the place. So in the physics there are these Laurens group symmetries. For instance, there are gauge groups in string theory. Uh in in even biology, one studies apparently graduates and igon vectors and igon spaces. And then of course vector spaces are groups under addition. And yeah for us groups mean symmetries or permutations. So here is the question. So suppose I have a group with a metric on it which is a metric. The group is a metric space. The metric is left invariant and right invariant. Yeah. When is this a norm? That is the question. So what do I mean by norm? The norm is exactly what you would expect. The length of a the length of two times a vector should be twice the length of the vector. The norm of G or twice let's call it G [applause] is twice normally except that this is I would write G if my group was Aelian and my group need not be. So I write it as X of G². So I should have a distance satisfying this. Now what is the distance? What is the norm or what is the length? Length is the distance from the identity under the group operation. So the identity of the group operation would be distance from E to G². So that's exactly taking from there. The distance from E to G power N is N * mod N* the distance. That is what I would mean by not. So what are examples of such groups? So one example is literally this board the plane and this is the example the distance is the length right so this is a so as we just said on the previous slide these this is a board Rn or R2 or you know this is a group under addition and then there's a norm and then the norm satisfies this property so this is the most standard example obviously more generally you can talk about a nonlinear space or even more general ban space whatever So not just arn so any one space any arative subgroup is available in torsion three. So what does torsion three mean? The basic notion to notion three means that I don't have any elements which are of finite order except the identity element right so I don't have any rotation by 15° if I 90° because four times that is identity why can I not have torsion three if I cannot have torsion elements because if I have suppose g power n is e then I can take the distance of identity to g power n on the one hand this is zero on the other hand this is what it is n * the distance from identity to But n is positive so I can divide by that. So I just get this and this means that g equals the only element with non-trivial with the only torsion element is the identity. Fine. The interesting thing is that the converse is also true. If g is a billion in three you can put a norm on it. So I [snorts] will tell you why because this is if this is one slide not more than that and it involves the axum of choice. Okay fine. So but what about the question really therefore is what about nonabilian groups a billion example is obvious. So is there a nonabilian example of a group with a non and of course no such examples were known when I thought about this question. So why did I think about this question? I was doing something in probability theory and with Bala Rajatnam and there were some stoastic inequalities which were true which we proved in semigroups with a non with a translation invariant metric not a non and then in a billion groups with a norm and so I was trying to understand if we could prove those for nonabelian groups with a non and then I tried to look for examples and as I said no such examples exist so fine so what can you do so I didn't know what to do. So I emailed lots of people and I asked several experts as well. One of them was at Stanford. So I asked her and uh but anyway, nobody could give me any answers and uh nobody could tell me any results. So there are no examples were known and no theorems saying such a group cannot exist or if it exists it has to have these properties or nothing was known. Okay fine. So fine. So let's go take a step back. Of course I will tell you the answer in 5 minutes but so let's take a step back. So if you don't insist on this non condition you just insist on there being a metric then they such groups occur all the time especially in geometric group theory. So there are word metrics and free groups and monoids there is uh yeah so monoids is the same as semigroups of course with identity. So yeah and there are every group of course has a left invariant remmanion metric. compact league groups have bin invariant metrics. I suppose you can do something. So uh great. So therefore there exist like lots and lots of examples from geometry not of a norm but just of a metric either left invariant or by invariant right invariant. So that &gt;&gt; are examples that if you still get something &gt;&gt; you mean group of it could still any previous information &gt;&gt; about the non about the metric. &gt;&gt; Yeah. I mean so there was no metric on a non there was no norm and a nonabelian group that we [clears throat and snorts] knew about. So uh if if so if your aelionization is tortion free then certainly it has a norm. &gt;&gt; Now you can ask if it lifts to a norm above maybe &gt;&gt; it probably doesn't but &gt;&gt; right so in fact so yeah okay well I will tell you the answer but maybe I'll tell you the punch line. Fine. every norm on a every so you can't have a non on a nonobian group but you can have a semi non where the positivity is not necessary if non G is zero G need not be the identity between the others and the kernel of this where is all the G non G equal to Z that is precisely the the commutator [clears throat] so every semi norm on a nonabilian group pass factors through its ailionization okay &gt;&gt; so that's the answer yeah so there is some information which is that you lose everything nonabelian in if you want a norm. Yeah. So uh anyways let me define so so in the language of geometry one doesn't call it a norm like this one would call it a length function in so instead of metric people use length functions in geometry. So I'm just telling you different languages. So length function on either a semigroup monoid or a group oops sorry uh uh a length function is uh this this is some non- negative valued function. This is basically the triangle inequality. This is positivity and this is symmetry. So it's exactly a metric ex with these three metric properties. Uh if there was no inverses because it was a semigroup or a mono then the third you can ignore the third condition. But so how is this the length function? So basically what we are saying is what is the length? The length is uh going to be obviously the distance from e to g. Okay. Now if you want to say something like uh so what so what we really want to say here is it's not just any distance function if the distance function has a little extra structure which is that the length of um let's see what do I want to say so yeah so basically the point is this length function should also be left in there [clears throat] meaning that the distance from uh g a to gb is the distance from a to be. Okay. Now, how does that help? Because if now I have a triangle inequality, uh so what is length of GH? This is distance from identity to GH which is distance from E to G plus distance of G to GH. And now this is left in variance. So I can cancel and this is exactly length of E plus length of length of G plus G. So, so some of length functions correspond to left invariant metrics and the reverse the reverse ways. This is how you go backwards as well. If I have a if I take this metric out of the length function then this is left invariant because the translations go inside and cancel out. Okay, great. So, this is a so this is in the language of geometry this left invariant matrix are called length functions. What happens? What is called a non the non property is that it's homogeneous. is set to be homogeneous if this happens. The distance from identity to G power n is oops yeah is this is working. Okay. So this is what is would be called the nonabelian version of a n because g power n multiplicative notation. So the question then is in the language of geometry the question is if g is nonabelian can any length function be homogeneous? Same question. And now there is a result of mining which says that if G is a connected le group and not a billion then this cannot happen. I will tell you why. If G has nil potence degree 2 this cannot happen either. So this is a calculation which maybe I can show you. So what does it mean to have nil potence degree 2. So nil potence means you take commutators and again commutator degree two means that the second time you take commutator you get identity which means that the commutator itself the first time you take was in the center that's why it commutes with the all of g right so that means that every time I take uh so now now look at the right hand side I take gn and hn right so [clears throat] I'm taking gn and hn so which means that basically I'm taking n of these These elements pass n of those atoms. There are n square many transactions right every time I create a transaction I create a copy of the commutator and that is central that is in the center. So I can just push that all the way to wherever. Now I take one more copy one more transaction one more central element. So every time I have n square transactions I get n square of these elements which lie in the center and so that's exactly where the left hand side is the right hand side. But now let's see the length of both sides. Suppose I had a non suppose I had a homogeneous length function is length of gh n² sorry n square but what is this since it's a length function since it's a norm this is n² and length of h and on this side the length of g n hn g minus n hus so whatever this is it is growing linearly because of triangle inequality is n * the length of g to n * length of h. On the other hand, it's also growing quadratically. So how is something quadratic growing slower than something linear? Only if this length is zero otherwise it cannot grow smaller. But if this length is zero then when is the length function zero the element has to be the identity. when is the combinator identity if they come true. So again nonobian is not so that's why if G has the importance degree two norms cannot exist so so basically uh [clears throat] on the other hand if you have a semigroup or a monoid then this was explained well three monoid then this was explained to me by Robert Young of Kurant uh that there is something called a levenstein metric which is a word metric which always exists. So for certain classes of groups length function homogeneous length function or a norm cannot exist non-avian groups on the other hand for every single primonoid such a function always exists. So what is the answer for a gen that was still the question do is there can produce an example or can prove that these don't exist okay so without so with this preamble here is now the main result. So the following are equivalent and the answer is they don't exist. So uh G is a billion torsion three if and only if it has a non if and only if in the language of geometry it has a length function that is homogeneous. But I don't even need homogeneous just this double condition is enough. So we will prove all of these are equivalent. I'm going to give you almost a complete proof if and only if G embeds into a bound space. So as we started out by saying that these are some obvious examples of no take a lice or take any subgroup in a in a in Rn or in space clearly the norm scales it turns out these are the only examples there are no others so the natural examples are the only ones and so in some sense this is a slogan for you know also the unity of mathematics you know because uh you like algebra you like aian groups well here is an analysis definition or characterization if you like geometric groups theory well you can say that's the same as embedding into a banana space so I mean all these things are really connected they are equivalent and one has to of course mention this phrase of turban wild here in these days the angel of topology and the devil of abstract algebra fight for the soul of every individual discipline of mathematics so but sometimes angels and demons you know can be one and the same so uh okay so that's that's the that's the thing that's the main theorem and the rest of the talk I will try to prove the main theorem Okay, so clearly if you embed into a man space then you are a billion and dorsion free that's obvious [snorts] and you are a metric space with a norm also obvious if you are a metric space with a two-sided invariant metric then you are left invariant so and if you have a norm then it's too homogeneous so all these implications are trivial right so the first thing I will do is tell you why if a group is a and torsion free you can put a norm on it you can embed it into a van space Okay. And that is going to use zon. Next we are going to show that basically three implies two. Meaning if you are two homogeneous if your doubling condition happens then you are then you have the condition for every single that's a very cute uh exercise but we will do that exercise and the the finally the hard part of course is if you are you know if you have a norm then you are obedient in torsion free. Tossion free is again easy that we saw already that you are obedient. If you have a normal okay so let's start with why is every a torsion free group embeds into one space so exercise if I take any any real vector space this has this Why? And the answer is basically this. You take any H basis H or whatever basis and then you give each of them the norm. Let's say B= 1 and then you take the L uh alpha v * D this is you can check it's a finite sum of course so [clears throat] and that's that's a n so every every real vector space has a n okay so now let's prove the question let's answer the question why does one imply four meaning the title of the slide so suppose I have an aelion and torsion free group then it's a subgroup of this right because it is it's basically a Q you basically are base changing from Q to R but actually you're doing it from Z to R so the point is if my AI group is uh Z if it's integers I just get the real numbers but if my abilion group is R itself then what I get R tensor R / Z is an enormous vector space it's not just one dimensional it is very very big but it nevertheless it is a real vector space that is because of torsion freess and so on. This is a real vector space. So I can put a normal let's put a normal and now restrict it to g tensor q. So all we do when we say g tensor q is we first of all we take a subspace of this with over the rationals. But basically all we are doing is we are just taking g and introducing denominators. We like 1 / n g / n. Basically all we are doing here is saying fractions of g. So now if my G was R then R already is closed under fraction. So then suddenly I reduced from this enormous vector space just down to R itself something like that right okay great and now it's very easy just do the Koshy completion the point is this vector space we already had a norm and now this this vector space had a norm on it which is scaling invariant so just now Koshi complete and that becomes a real vector space again with the norm extends to the whole thing and that's therefore a complete R vector space under a norm that's a valance space so just the standard constructions you would expect but you can do this fine so this is why uh one and four are therefore equivalent okay so now again why does three imply two see the title of the slide this is another cute exercise so now this time I will ask you guys a question let's say suppose I know that length of g square I know that this this doubling condition length of square is twice length of g can I can you tell me another number n for which length of g power N is n * the length of four &gt;&gt; four so you can do that length of g square of g this implies that so length of g4th is length of g² squared so that's twice length of g squ and you can keep going so for every power of two this is clear the question now is what about length of g^ 6 I want to prove this is equal to 6 * length of g how do I do that so the answer is I don't I do the following I take a power of two bigger than uh six so I take g to the 8 this on the one hand I know is length of is 8 * length of yes but now because this is a triangle inequality this is length of the 6 plus one more and one more I keep them individual or I can I can do here as well two of them but whatever Yeah, but now because of triangle again this is less than 6 * G g. So I just break it up into lots of G's and so what I get is this is 8. So I started with eight and I ended with eight. So everything in the middle is an equality cuz this is an equality and I'm done. So it's a very cute trick. This is uh I found it somewhere in the literature I think in the paper by Gaja and Kobak if I remember. And so yeah, so everything is done and then you can do this for any positive integer the same way and for negative integers you can use symmetry and so you're done fine. So except the fact that the proof for three implies two is not complete. Why not? Because in three we were assuming that the metric was left invariant and in two we are assuming it's by invariant. So I need to prove the right invariance as well. Fine except for that the proof. The hard part is this. Well, that's no this is the easy part. The hard part is that because we don't know it yet. The hard part is like three lines of proof. That's it. But it's it's very clear. We are getting there. Okay. So now finally the main part of it is that I have a group. I have a norm on it which means just I just have this condition left in variant metric and I want to prove that the group is a so torsion three was already done. We checked that. So that's fine. Okay. So so now here are some other con. So this is where I'm telling you about Milner's theorem while we wait for the billion proof. So if if G is n important we saw that G has to be a billion because if G is nil potent you can look at the notance degree and then if the notance degree was two then we proved that the actually the notance degree was one because anything in the commutator is uh you know you can push it past. So G take the composition series of G until you get to the subgroup which has the importance degree two but then that reduces to the calculation we did here the n square transactions and then actually the nutance degree two would have nutters degree one that can't exist so that's a problem okay here is now the other one so as we said in the main theorem which I haven't yet finished proving if you take any aelion torsion free group it embeds into a man space can that have a non-abian counterpart. So first of all, what might so this is a very vague question. So I'm I'm going to give you one answer to this, but I mean this is not a theorem. So what is the non-abelian counterpart of a ban space? First of all, mathematically what would you suggest it is? So in my case I thought of the following. A banana space is a complete is a geodessically complete uh space aian group of course and what is the geodessic between two points in a banana space? It's the straight line. So what are nonabelian geotically complete groups? They are codly groups. And suppose we had translation invariant metric. So suppose I have a group with a translation invariant metric. A theorem of Milner which I mentioned says that any such group any such connected group is actually Rn cross K for a compound K. So now does this have a so can can this have a non? Well, let's restrict the non. Suppose this was translation gradient. Let's restrict the non if that metric was a non to K. Right? So I take an element of K, a non-trivial element of K and look at the distance from identity to K. So that's just a positive number. I scale. So of course every power of K belongs to the compact subgroup. So I but what happens to the powers distance to the identity? The length grows unbounded. But this is [snorts] a compact group. So I cannot have an unbounded set of unbounded sequence of elements. So there cannot exist a non-trivial element of K in the first place because that would grow. That means K is the identity. K is trivial. &gt;&gt; But then G is a billion because G is RM under. So again this is still a if it is a norm. So a connected D group with a B invari which is a norm has to be that was Mer theorem basically. So again this doesn't so there there were reasons to believe that yeah these such groups don't exist but that is very far from being a truth. So now I'm telling you the final bit of the proof. So this was in 2014 that I first had this question and then I asked lots of people no answers were found. Then I gave up on the question myself and I had other things to do like move back to India. So then but then I went back to the US that same winter my first winter to terren's office and I asked him the question and he also couldn't solve it. So we should feel happy that he couldn't immediately see five but so this is the discussion we had that suppose take you take any group it's a normal if I want to prove it's a billion he felt we should try to prove a billion so but if I want to prove it's a billion then why I want to check that any two elements commute so the key quantity which I will call as kq is the norm of the commutator which we discussed over there right why is this a key quantity because if this is zero for all alpha beta then the commutator is identity If that is identity, G is a right. So this is why we want to keep we want to show somehow that this length this norm of the the the commutator of any two elements in my group is zero. How do you do that? So of course to being an analyst uh he says no you have to prove that it is less than epsilon for every positive epsilon. So you must use the archimedian property of the real numbers. So can we show that it is very small? Can we show that it is less than epsilon for every epsilon? So, okay, some things you can do. So, first of all, let's no. Okay, so maybe I should say the following, right? So, suppose I have a let's write this down. So, I have a group with a non. So, I want to show so G is a non. I want to show it's a so I just basically need to fix two elements only for all alpha beta and g alpha and beta. It's enough to show that the subgroup they generate is a beta. So I may as well think of my G as being this. This is my G and I want to show that this the norm restricts to this. This is a billion then G is a billion. So on this I can again an absolute length function but I can make sure that the length of alpha alpha inverse and beta beta inverse all these lengths are less than one because I can length function divided by anything is also a length function right so [snorts] normalize the length function so that they are all one then first of all here is what it is the length of the commutator my key quantity kq is less than four that is obvious plus but now we are going to show later on that the length is actually preserved under conjugation so when I said that we haven't yet shown the left invariance implies right invariance if it's a n that loose end that is translates exactly to this condition we will show that in in a threeline proof probably in the next slide or something but now can anyone now tell me why this length this commutator is bounded above by two not four &gt;&gt; if You have the property. &gt;&gt; I'm assuming the one. &gt;&gt; Yes, you're assuming that this is conjugation invariant and you're assuming that all the lengths are less equals 1. [snorts] &gt;&gt; Yes. So you exact. So what you do is you say alpha beta alpha inverse beta inverse and you say length of this well I break it into two parts. This length is the same as length of beta which is at most one and this length is beta inverse which is also at most one and so you get two. Okay I did it the other way here alpha and then the rest of them but anyway I guess great. So therefore this is less equals but now I claim that you can do this even better. You can do 4 over 3. So now we are just going to play these word games basically. Now how do you show that? So now here is the key fact. How do you show that a number is less than 4 over 3? This is a real number. You show that a number is less than 4 over 3. If three times that number is less than four. That is everybody in class 1 or two should know this. Maybe there inequalities. I don't know. Fine. So how do you show that this is less than four? This is there's no [snorts] good chocolate. I use the small to show that something is less than four. So I want to show four is bigger than 3. But what is this? This is three times the length of alpha beta alpha beta. And I must use now the fact that it is a n. What is three times the length? By definition, this is the length of by the nonp property, it's the length of this element Q. This is a string of length four. So I have a string of length 12, right? So I write this DOWN and since this is again a basic notion seminar, we are going to use the basic notion of associivity. You can write this as product of three different strings of length four or you can write a product of four different strings of length three and now we know what this is [snorts] this has length less than one conjugate this has length less than one length less than one so exactly and so we get so I can say that I've never appreciated or like the associative law groups as much as did this like because you can't play with anything more than these very basic notions right so this is the notion of associivity and now here this is less than four. So therefore we are done. So 3 * something less than four and so this is less than four. So the question is can you come up with these tricks? Can you keep doing better and better tricks to come down to zero? We went from four to two 4 over three but you know we haven't even gone below one let alone close to zero. So this is when we this is the this is the discussion we had in Tao's office and then then I left back went back to uh San Francisco to fly back and Tao said that uh yeah can I put it on my blog uh so I said sure please put it on your blog and maybe some other people can give some maybe they'll find a clever clue. So here is the blog post and this was posted on 16th December in the US which is 17 December in India. So then I I took off after the blog post and then I landed in India after 15 hours or some direct non-stop flight and there were so many comments on the blog. Uh this might be a later time but yeah there are a bunch of people who have commented some of these names actually I think every one of the names here is a collaborator on that paper on our paper. Yeah. So uh there are four names here. So sorry so I should mention what he said. So here is a curious question posed to me by Apurva. I don't know the answer to that. He poses the question triangle inequality and the linear group. This is the key the norm condition right and uh conjugation invariance blah blah blah. What is not clear is if one can keep then he in the fold which I have skipped over he mentions this calculation 4 over 3 and two of course 2 and 4 over 3. He he stops here and he says what is not clear is if one can keep arguing like this to keep improving the lower bound until this low the upper bound on the norm until the upper bound must vanish but uh anyway this seems like a problem that might be receptive to a crowdsource attack and so I'm posing it here in case readers want to make progress and so this brings me back to the opening slides where you know mathematics is a very individual profession or research or hobby or whatever you want to call it. But uh there are some attempts like this where you you know try to get crowds involved and lot of people did get involved. They said lots of suggestions and tips and ideas. So the first two days so and the point is this got solved in 5 days but not really 5 days because three out of those five days weren't really doing anything. So the first two days people actually tried to find examples that will will be account will have a nonabelian group with a length function you know loop groups and winding numbers and algebraic topology and lots of such things but uh as we now know from the theorem such examples don't exist so at after 2 days I think people mainly gave up and then they started to think about how can we prove the group is a big okay so here is also as I said so the story of the timeline So uh the first comment in 3 hours was the loose end that if you have the norm and you are merely left invariant then you're right invariant as well. So that was done in 3 hours and I was sort of beating my head you know why didn't I see it for the last 3 years but there are some very clever people uh another one will show up later in the talk. Uh so here is the lema. So this is Tobius's uh result. If g is a homogeneous length function then l is conjugation in gradient. And if you translate this condition under the fact that length is distance from identity then this conjugation invariance is the same as saying that the distance is right invarian. So suddenly it becomes by invarian. So you don't need to assume right invariance. You get it for free from the length from the norm. Okay great. So uh why so the proof is inside the remaining part of the slide. So okay the proof is still inside the remaining part of the slide. Okay. So here is the proof. So, so now this is where you use the fact that conjugation powers of conjugates are very nice to calculate. N * the length of this thing is length of this to the n. But that conjugate to the n is this. And now you use the triangle inequality. So you get this. And this is true for all f. So all you do is now divide by n. You get the length of g inverse on the left is less than the length of h plus some error term. And now this is the next basic notion to remember which is called the archimedian property of real numbers. If you have a real number less than another real number plus anything any as small as possible then you can get rid of that right you can take limits. So this is the Archimedian property. Again, I have never appreciated the Archimedian property as much as I did in Tobius's truth. And so this is of course one side length of the conjugate less than length of H. But conjugation is an equivalence relation. So you're done. So great. So this addresses the loose end. This finishes everything and we get that it is u yeah conjugation invariant. So this trick also works. This also works. Good. So now so then so then people again so with Tobius's uh result people got energized we started to find stuff as I said the first two days was not really very productive because everybody was trying that way but then finally people said okay fine so know this is 2 and 1/2 days later some progress had been made. So from 4 over 3 people improved to 5 over 4. It's an improvement. 5 over 4 is 20 over 16. Somebody improved it to 19 over 16 one 1 hour later. So you know like this is like Will Savin in 24 hours posting uh that uh unit distance problem improvement or something. But anyway this was done on the fly and every everything was happening on Teran Star's blog. That was where people were posting all these comments improvements in the comment section. So the whole history is still there. And then there were more clever calculations and people tried to get it below one. Finally some insane like know conjugation this that something insane made it work. The bound went below 22 over 23. It's like the world record for the 100 m race you on the marathon or something going down. But still I mean know so now and then there was a 24-hour barrier. So when I said three of the five days were done doing nothing. Well, not towards this proof. The first two days were gone and this 24-hour barrier was gone. And uh basically nobody had any idea how to go even crazier, even cleverer. And then this is where the next interesting feature comes up. Everything was happening on the blog and there was a computer involved. So Sidhil who is my colleague uh he he had a remarkable idea. He said I will do both things at the same time. So from the beginning he was spending his time trying to come up with algebraic topology and geometric examples to not work and he programmed his computer to try and make it work. So he did both together. So it's a very safe approach I guess. So uh and he actually found it or his computer found it. So here is the so the right hand side. Okay. But I can show you the the conclusion was the f the original conclusion was 0.95 something like this and Sedat's proof gave it 816. So okay so let's look at the right hand side this is Shat's post here is a computerenerated proof on the bound of the length of a commutator for a linear norm the norm right and so it starts literally with he made the computer write it down into a form that human beings can understand statement next statement the previous ones imply the next one so that way and it took 126 lines so it started from the norm of alpha inverse or a inverse is less than one therefore the norm of the conjugate is less than one. Norm of B inverse is less than one. So the norm of this conjugate is less than one. And you keep going. The 125th step is that the norm of A bar B bar. So A bar means A inverse. This is a 68 element string which is 17 copies of the commutator. So the length of the commutator to the 17 is less than 12 13.8596 divide by 17 and then the length is less than 13 whatever.815. 815. So therefore 826. So this was done on a Saturday morning apparently. Uh uh [clears throat] Saturday morning in America was Friday night. So Pace Neielson this is the left hand side now. So since this is all UCLA time 20th December 3 days later at or 4 days later at 8:00 p.m. So and Pace Nielson was in Utah which is one time zone ahead. He had finished his dinner on Friday night. He was sitting at home. He saw this comment and then in the next 100 minutes, it took him 100 minutes to read the whole thing, to understand the whole thing and to improve on it and then to write all the math here in the comment. So some people are not only very sharp, they're also very fast. So he says that my this was beautiful. My intuition was that we have some reason to do something. When I read this computer's proof, I was surprised that this is exactly what the computer did with some extra ideas thrown in. And then he says that the first 43 lines he summarized establish this. The next 30 lines establish this and then here is some improvement from for what we were doing. And then the last few lines establish this. And now also he said we can improve on this in the following way. So all of that in 100 minutes. Fine. So that was that. So okay that is all sort of fun and games. But now let me again tell you the math. So finally what was the computer doing? people tried to understand that. So this was 21st December 9:30 a.m. Uh and then I think a few Tao probably didn't answer that day but the next morning he did and then with discussions we got this lemon out of the whole computer uh input. Suppose I have four elements in a group with a non with a right left in your homogeneous length function right suppose I have four elements x is conjugate to wy and to zw inverse then the length of x is less equals this thing and the key point is it doesn't depend on w fine so uh let me prove this for you and then let me show you um [clears throat] an application where we will go even more beyond below So 816 or whatever the proof is not that bad. So the idea is the following. Write down X to be the conjugate of uh WY. Write down also conjugate of this thing. And the claim now is that I write X^ 2n. Okay XR the first N copies I write in the first way and the second N copies I write in the second way. And now don't look at this inequality. Look at the picture. Okay. So the the the length of this big string here, this big string is drawn in the picture. There's a S at the start. There's a T inverse at the end and so on. So the length of this big string that is what I want to upgrade that's less than the length of S and the length of T inverse and everything in between. But everything in between is a conjugate the outermost arc. The length is conjugate invariant. So I can kick up like discard those W and W inverse, right? Then I get a Y. Fine. Then so what I so maybe I'll write down maybe easier to see there's a s there's a wy wy s inverse d wy no this is something else &gt;&gt; inverse w inverse sorry thank you no zw inverse length of this that's equal length of plus length of t inverse plus length of the rest. So I'll take out the rest. So yeah, so I'll take this out. Take this out. So this is less equal. Now this is a conjugate. So I can get rid of the w inverse because it's conjugate invariant. Now again I get these terms. I get plus length of y plus length of z plus length of the rest. where again of course I have a W and W inverse. So again I could get rid of these guys. I again get a length of Y again length of Z again get rid of the WW inverse and you keep going and you can check that all the W's and all the W inverses just go away and finally I get another length of S S inverse and length of T. So there are n y's there are n z's and then there are these four terms and now you know what to do right exactly what to have done divide by 2 n and take n to infinity and then you get length of x because that's twice 2n length of x is less than the average of y and z and some error term that goes away. So this is what it is. Now why is this useful? So this is useful in the following way. Let me write this down here maybe. So I'll write down the lema first just a statement and then we will apply it very interestingly. So x is conjugate to wy and dw inverse imply the length of x is less THAN [snorts] OKAY. So how do you specialize? So I specialize with this x is alphabet. So x is alpha beta alpha inverse beta inverse again one more prime there's a nine element string okay and then I call w so y was something y is alpha bar beta inverse alpha beta and then alpha beta sorry I should know this it this must be this yes and the and W is beta. So x is conjugate to wy. Let's write down w y. This is beta here. Is this conjugate? Yes. Because see there's two alphas here. If I multiply on the left right of alpha inverse and multiply on the left by alpha, I get this is a commutator. This is a commutator. So I get exactly this but the alpha was moved here. So it's conjugate. And similarly you can check that x is conjugate to z inverse. Fine. So with these four elements I claim. So first of all let's write down the length of x before I claim anything. It's the length of two copies of this thing plus this uh fine but and what is it by the lema. It's less than the length of y. Well what is y? y is y is the conjugate of two things. So the length of y is conjugate invariant. So length of y is the length of this by the triangle inequality 1 + 1 &gt;&gt; and the length of z for the same reason is also 1 + 1. So two. So length of x is at most 2. Now the claim is that 8 11 and 8 over 11 is uh much less. How how do you prove 8 over 11? You know what to do. Multiply by 11. So 11 * this thing. This is a 44 element string. So you write down 44 elements. Separate them into groups of four. Okay? And you notice that in groups of four the 11 element string every one of them is a conjugate. So this is less than the length of the nine element string 11 element string plus 11 element string plus 11 but each of them is a conjugate. So the inside n inside 9 and 9 and every one of those nine element strings exactly looks like x. So every one of those has size two at most two. So 8 over and so this is a 72. So suddenly you know we have shaved off a tenth of a second from the 100 m effort. But of course the problem is this is a finite improvement and we want to come down to zero. So if you take if you think about it logarithmically this is some negative number in log. This is negative in log. 72 is even more negative in log. But it's a finite reduction. We want to go down to log of 0 which is minus infinity. So that's not a finite reduction doesn't help. We need something that will work infinitely many times. So what is the trick? It turns out that this internal this this trick of using x this this lema here you can cleverly use it infinitely many times into one tool and you can use that tool infinitely many times. So sort of a quadratic infinity uh infinity square many times uh to do the job and the final step as it turns out I have I can show you the proof later on but the final step when you write it out explicitly can be used either explicitly using binomial combinatorics. So we have seen some algebra, some geometry, some analysis. You can do some combinatorics or you can write it in the language of probability theory. So uh sort of all kinds of mathematics comes together to prove this. And uh the key step finally is you want to show that something grows faster than something or something grows slower than something. And so the sum of n such iid variables iid as average spread meaning uh standard deviation of the magnitude square root n. So when you take iid n variables the variance is n and the standard deviation is square root n and this is going to bound a multiple of the power of this as n grows to infinity but what is this? This is this is growing linearly in the length and this is only square root n and so when you divide it out you get exactly that. So the upper there's a linearly growing quantity upper bounded by a square root n quantity. So then of course you cannot do that unless your quantity itself was zero just like in the commutator case it was a quadratically growing quantity bounded above by a linearly growing quantity right so that's that's how one does it and this was so this was not this not exactly this was observed by ta but I will show you what he said and so in some sense it finished the proof uh just less than 5 days later so uh this was the so just to remember the show the timeline line. This was the 22 over 23. Almost 24 hours later, Siddhart Gardgill had this computer generated solution and then finally this lema was abstracted. Oh, so Tao was awake, I guess, because this was this Oh, no, no, no. This is almost Yeah. Yeah. This is only 4 hours later. So, Tao himself was awake and then because I remember he had a part to play in this lema. So, and then in 4 hours the lema was made, the lema was applied. We got to 8 over 11. Within uh 4 hours more it was 2 over 3. But again these finite improvements at this point stopped mattering. And then there was this idea again by the first guy who suggested this good idea Tobia Stritz. And he suggested that think of FMK. So think of so not just the length of alpha power M. No just not just not saying that this length of alpha not the length of commutative power K is smaller. Think of this length in two variables and think of it as sort of a discrete heat equation kind of that was his his words. So there some kind of discrete heat equation evolution. There is a drift in this equation. When you think of it probabilistically there is some expectation that is non zero. So there is some drift and the drift is what helps us. And the last uh yeah this happened uh let's see P.M. game this six this was 6 hours later and then I guess Tao had woken up and then he he said that one can finally do this to kill off the problem uh one can do some kind of a simple random walk and then move by this these two steps 1 - 1 0 or 1 - 1 that is roughly the drifts in these two steps with half probability of each and that will hit something with an exponentially high probability by a churnoff dot so he really applied some high power relatively high power tools turn for me very high powered uh but then uh later on when we did the work oops sorry when we did the when we wrote up the paper it turned out we just needed koshi schwarz or Jensen's inequality which is much more basic than churn just from basic thing like weak law numbers and Jensen did the job for the last step okay so the last thing to mention then is that if you can this was say that the length becomes zero if you have exact triangle inequality and you have exact norm or double condition the length becomes zero. You can make that quantitative. So what do I mean? Let G be a group. Let L the this be a quote unquote almost like almost length function length function up to error such that so you have the triangle inequality up to an additive error. So the point is the error doesn't depend on the whether you take G power N or H power N. This C is the same regardless of that. And you have homogeneity. You have the non-property up to another additive element. Then for any alpha and beta there is a global uniform bound or universal bound on the commutator. It is 4 * c + 5 * c prime. So in our case in the specific question we had the length was always non- negative. The subaritity the triangle inequality was exact that the c was zero and the homogeneity was exact right because the length of g square is by the first property less than twice length of g by the second property it's bigger than twice length of g. So it is equal and so that's C and C prime both being zero give you length of G square equals twice length of so here of course we have far weaker hypothesis we don't need length to be zero infinity valued the length of identity element need not be zero none of these need to be zero g need not be the length need not be symmetric still this is the full power of the result we use and this has been uh applied in some situations in the future to uh groups with something called a stable commutator length and to some other amenable groups maybe and so on. I don't know much about geometry because I'm [snorts] not a geometer but there have been some applications. Okay, so that is about it. I will just show you some slides some pictures for the slide. This is the paper when it came out uh on the archive. So we wrote the we finished the let's see where was this thing 22nd of December. Then over the Christmas break people were busy I guess but then later on in the new year we wrote the paper [snorts] and uh uh Gil Kalai has some polymath blog where he said called it a spontaneous polymath 14. So because this wasn't normally the polymath project people decide beforehand this is the question you want to solve then you solve it. This just organically grew up because Tao asked it on his blog and so this was called a spontaneous polyan protein a success. uh at that point these were the existing polymath projects. So the last one was classifying homogeneous nons groups. The first one was the new proofs and bounds for the density hails Jew theorem. This is some theorem in sort of combinatorics kind of thing which is proved using very high powered erodic theory and so on. But then the first polymer project was initiated by Gowers and he said can one find a elementary quote unquote elementary proof of that that did get found in the first successful project and so ever since that project every time people write the polymath paper it's called DHJ polymaths by tradition DHJ stands for density hails Jew the theorem itself and the first time that got published in the annals of mathematics when it got pub when it got yeah done not all of these problems in the polymath scheme are successful. For example, if you just look at these things, proving rotas conjecture proposed, intransitive dice proposed, they were never completed or improving the bounds for Roth's theorem proposed. Then there were some mini polymaths where people solved IMO problems, which is also another thing people seem to be doing. Now, of course, you just ask your favorite AI and it will do it. &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; So anyway at the point when our paper came out these were the papers the papers that came out the other actual what do you call it famous uh polymath initiative in between was the part about bounded gaps between primes where the jang came up with 70 million people got together including tao and mayard was part of it saying can we reduce the 70 million and they brought it down to 200 something in the project now apparently there is six or something now it can come down to six and then there are things where people literally just wrote down so new equity distribution these are papers this is the 107 pages is the revised version focusing solely on these estimates so they published that paper apparently in the same journal I think this is why Tao suggested that we submit this paper to algebra and number theory because there's much more analysis than algebra but I think tao had some you know positive experience from the previous polymath project and this is about groups so I guess he say let's send it to an algebra journal they fortunately definitely accepted it. Uh and yeah, that's about it. So, thanks again. [applause] &gt;&gt; Wonderful. Anybody have any comments or questions? I go back to the previous question when you're passing from you if you go through levels. So like when something you take out these parts suppose you express your your part like in &gt;&gt; okay &gt;&gt; so remove the first one by again &gt;&gt; and now you have a sort of milder level of noniveness you can maybe evaluate one right &gt;&gt; but you can keep going do you know if this is &gt;&gt; I have never seen yeah you're talking about something like formal defformationations basically &gt;&gt; yes &gt;&gt; right so yeah No, I haven't seen uh defamation theory connected to this but as a group as as the statement for groups it is very I mean it's very sharp that you know if you have anything nonabilian you will not have a norm &gt;&gt; correct you can pretend it's a billion by now taking the first level I wasn't fixing any &gt;&gt; right so then I haven't seen how this works &gt;&gt; you could give something meaningful in the end like when one functions. [clears throat] &gt;&gt; Right. Right. Right. No, I haven't actually. I don't think any of us thought about this, but uh maybe it's worth Yeah, it's worth looking into more carefully. &gt;&gt; Now, we can try think about it. &gt;&gt; Then you should think about Absolutely. Please think about it and let me know. I should probably check here as well just in case there are uh in case there are this what do you call it? Wait, how do [snorts] I get to the Escape. Escape. &gt;&gt; Escape. I see. &gt;&gt; In case there are chat questions here. I doubt it. But normally there are other questions here. &gt;&gt; There are no chat questions. Go. &gt;&gt; Have there been other successful poly projects after this one? This is 2018. &gt;&gt; So interesting. &gt;&gt; I So in fact, I should have I forgot to mention this. So there was this uh let's do this. Uh yeah. So here. So the week after so the results submitted January 11th and I think 2 days later Tao announced another project that okay we have started a new polymer project he's always very busy that was about slightly more important stakes than this question the debru constant for the reban zita function &gt;&gt; and the so he had just written a paper with Rogers about that constant being non- negative or something and they were trying to improve the bound the the reman hypothesis now becomes that the constant is zero &gt;&gt; so they were trying to bring down that constant bounds like bounds on the length here but those are slightly harder to do so that I don't know if that at some point they stopped it and published their findings so they were they so um yeah they had lots of sort of simulations as well and it's a long paper lots of findings in there obviously they did not bring it down to zero but so there are partially successful projects there are you know different levels there was something about sunflower yeah there okay but that's launched Erdos sunflower lema so yeah I don't do there as I said there are few successful projects And one was of course the DHJ theorem. One was this uh gaps between primes which that was being done and that was on the side James Maynard was doing his work and then he published something paralleling their results or between many many primes right and then of course he became very famous and there was our work was successful and uh let's see I can you even see here and forget the &gt;&gt; which one &gt;&gt; yeah which one say a deterministic way to find primes launched August 2009 research results have been published So I mean I think people meet uh with varying degrees of success I suppose and like for something as large as the reman hypothesis you know maybe what they got on the debun human constant is should be termed a success I don't know &gt;&gt; but I mean if I go to this web page right now &gt;&gt; oh where is this right now I will have to look but there have been polyan projects launched afterwards not just the debru constant &gt;&gt; yeah but I suspect now with AI coming up you know people won't really they will go even more backwards and go even more exclusive and ask AI by themselves. So this crowd sourcing model will go the other way now because of AI maybe it's my guess but we'll see. &gt;&gt; All right if there are no more questions or let's make A [applause] &gt;&gt; I should probably do some Go here. &gt;&gt; Sorry, I didn't hear you. &gt;&gt; My AI refused to give me the time this morning when I asked that. He said, "I'm finished. I'll be sorry." &gt;&gt; What? Really? [laughter] &gt;&gt; What AI was this? Gemini or &gt;&gt; a crazy. I don't know. Something is happening to my AI. Yeah.
