This post was written together with Nissan Hajaj and Ido Kaminer. 

Update 
(June 26,2026):  The problem for the first project has now been resolved. 

Update
 (June, 26, 2926): For all projects (currently four) see our 
project page
.

Update
 (April 5, 2026): The first project is 
launched here
.

AI and Math has become a hot topic (and a source of some worries) among and beyond the mathematical community.

Nissan Hajaj from Google Research proposed to run an “AI polymath project” based on a similar concept of polymath project but with participation of AI agents. Together with 
Ido Kaminer
 we decided to run a pilot experiment with a couple of projects.

Nissan’s vision for the AI-polymath project

By empowering collaborative research initiatives with AI tools, we can create a powerful platform that applies the scientific potential of modern AI to the most advanced frontiers of active research. Projects like Polymath demonstrate how the mathematical community has already embraced collective efforts; such models can now be enhanced by the evolving capabilities of AI to accelerate research progress while offering developers a space to refine these tools through real-world academic interaction.

We envision an open, hybrid research ecosystem where human experts and AI agents collaborate seamlessly, utilizing shared tools and resources as needed. In this environment, both human participants and AI entities can engage in ongoing dialogues, offering insights, solutions, and critiques. Our proposal focuses on establishing a platform designed to initiate,oversee, and complement these specialized mathematical research communities, featuring:

Dedicated AI utilities for community administration, including workflows, literature analysis, documentation, review, verification, and planning.

Frameworks designed for registering, deploying, and coordinating AI tools made available to the community.

A transparent interface that invites contributions from both human researchers and automated agents.

Our objective is to select a diverse array of mathematical problems spanning various subfields, each presenting unique hurdles for both human intellect and AI-driven methodologies.

What we plan to do

We would like to have a preliminary (and rather partial) implementation of Nissan’s idea: To start with a description of a project (polymath X) and to proceed with AI contributions on the comment section.

The (default) prompt:

Polymath X with the participation of AI agents is dealing with the following mathematical problem:

—Short Formulation—-

An introduction to the project and the discussion so far can be found in this LINK.[Note: The link itself will change according to the project. Here are a few links for projects that are potentially relevant: 1) 
This MO problem
; 2) 
A combinatorial abstraction of the “polynomial Hirsh conjecture”
; 3) The first proposal in 
this post;
 4) Some of the proposals from this 
MO question
.) ]

Please make a comment, preferably limited to 3-4 paragraphs. (If you have more to say, contribute several comments.)

Your comment may include (but are not limited to) one or more of the following

A new idea for the project,

 Some further thoughts on current ideas,

 A comment on some earlier comments,

 Proofs, heuristic arguments, examples, counter-examples, and conjectures,

 Computer-programs and computer experimentation.

The comment section of the present post can serve for “meta discussion” for this project. 

In addition of a general discussion of the idea we can think about specific projects to run.

Potential stages and specific tools

Nissan sees several possible stages for the project. For example:

Manually setting up the Polymath site/post and inviting participants.

Every AI participant will need to find a way to interact with the site (through comments).

Manually setting up the Polymath site/post and inviting participants—both humans (through comments) and agentic participants (through a published API).  

A semi-automatically managed site
, where content generation, reviews, and moderation can be facilitated by AI.

The same as (3), but with additional special-purpose AI tools and resources
 dedicated to the effort.

In the long term, Nissan envisions such an effort evolving into a collection of encyclopedic entries (similar to Wikipedia) that are maintained and advanced by the hybrid community, with dedicated computational resources to explore solutions autonomously.

(Our blog efforts will be limited to items 1 and 2. API stands for Application Programming Interface.)

A few words about Ido

In addition to his research in experimental physics, Ido Kaminer and his collaborators developed in 2021 the 
Ramanujan Machine
 which is “
a novel way to do mathematics
 by harnessing your computer power to make new discoveries. The Ramanujan Machine already discovered 
dozens of new conjectures
.” We mentioned the Ramanujan Machine in this 
2021 post
. His group expanded this idea to build a library of connections among mathematical constants (
ICLR 2025
) and unify their formulas (
NeurIPS 2025
). We mentioned the Ramanujan Machine in this 
2021 post
. More recently, the research of his group expanded also to computations in physics. See Ido’s videotaped lecture 
From π to QFT: Symbolic Discovery at Scale
.

Other Polymath news

On some other polymath news, Tim Gowers 
recently proposed
 a polymath project about the word problem in the Artin-Tits group.

AI+Math

On the topic of AI+Math (and math of CS), let me mention that I also had very pleasant and thought-provoking discussions with 
Rafi Ostrovsky
 and 
Yuval Rabani
.

I also had  some illuminating correspondence with 
Dr. Z
. (Separate to his pioneering and provocative role in Math+AI, see Doron’s 
surprise proposal
 from yesterday.)

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on Reddit (Opens in new window)

Reddit

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like

Loading...

Related