Announcement of The Shaw Laureates 2025
Accessibility Statement
Skip Navigation
Announcement of The Shaw Laureates 2025
USA - English
USA - español
USA - Deutsch
USA - Français
MEXICO - Spanish
BRAZIL - Portuguese
APAC - Traditional Chinese
India - English
Korea - 한국어
Japan - Japanese
News provided by
Shaw Prize
May 27, 2025, 06:23 ET
Share this article
Share to
X
Share this article
Share to
X
HONG KONG
,
May 27, 2025
/PRNewswire/ --
The Shaw Prize in Astronomy
is awarded in equal shares to
Continue Reading
The Shaw Laureates 2025 (from left to right): John Richard Bond and George Efstathiou, The Shaw Prize in Astronomy; Wolfgang Baumeister, The Shaw Prize in Life Science and Medicine; and Kenji Fukaya, The Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences.
John Richard Bond
Professor, Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics and University Professor,
University of Toronto
, Canada and
George Efstathiou
Professor of Astrophysics, University of
Cambridge, United Kingdom
for their pioneering research in cosmology, in particular for their studies of fluctuations in the cosmic microwave background. Their predictions have been verified by an armada of ground-, balloon- and space-based instruments, leading to precise determinations of the age, geometry, and mass-energy content of the universe.
The Shaw Prize in Life Science and Medicine
is awarded to
Wolfgang Baumeister
Director Emeritus and Scientific Member, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Germany
for his pioneering development and use of cryogenic-electron tomography (cryo-ET), an imaging technique that enables three-dimensional visualisation of biological samples, including proteins, macromolecular complexes, and cellular compartments as they exist in their natural cellular settings.
The Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences
is awarded to
Kenji Fukaya
Professor, Beijing Institute of Mathematical Sciences and Applications and the Yau Mathematical Sciences Center, Tsinghua University, PRC
for his pioneering work on symplectic geometry, especially for envisioning the existence of a category — nowadays called the Fukaya category — consisting of Lagrangians on a symplectic manifold, for leading the monumental task of constructing it, and for his subsequent ground-breaking and impactful contributions to symplectic topology, mirror symmetry, and gauge theory.
Tuesday,
27
May 202
5
.
At today's press conference in
Hong Kong
, The Shaw Prize Foundation announced the Shaw Laureates for 2025. Information was posted on the website
www.shawprize.org
at
Hong Kong
time 15:30 (GMT 07:30).
The Shaw Prize consists of three annual prizes: Astronomy, Life Science and Medicine, and Mathematical Sciences, each bearing a monetary award of
US$1.2 million
. This will be the twenty-second year that the Prize has been awarded and the presentation ceremony is scheduled for Tuesday,
21 October 2025
in
Hong Kong
.
SOURCE Shaw Prize
21
%
more press release views with
Request a Demo
×
Modal title
Also from this source
Bekanntgabe der Shaw-Preisträger 2026
Der Shaw-Preis in Astronomie wird zu gleichen Teilen verliehen an Ken'ichi Nomoto Emeritierter Professor und leitender Gastwissenschaftler des...
Annonce des lauréats de l'édition 2026 du prix Shaw
Le prix Shaw d'astronomie est décerné à parts égales à Ken'ichi Nomoto Professeur émérite et chercheur principal invité de l'Institut Kavli pour la...
More Releases From This Source
Explore
Education
Biotechnology
Health Care & Hospitals
Computer & Electronics
News Releases in Similar Topics