My task was um to illustrate and put in a wider context the great accomplishments of professor fault things. So this is something I'll try and do with this talk and sort of the easy part is that the mathematics is just so beautiful and the hard part is that there are many deep and influential ideas and I felt that in order to really kind of do the mathematics justice, I should put it in the context of problems that have fascinated humanity for thousands of years and these are diaphantine equations. And so I'm going to start with a famous theorem that is attributed to Pythagoras uh that says that if x y and z are lengths of the sides of a right angle triangle with z the longest side then x^2 + y^2 is always equal to z ^2. This is attributed to Pythagoras, but it was known to many ancient cultures. Um, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Chinese. Um, my favorite proof is a geometric proof that appears in a Chinese manuscript from the first century BC. The idea is to compute the area of this larger square in two different ways and then kind of cancel out and then you get this identity. All right. And so there's a natural question about whole numbers that is closely related to Pythagoras's theorem. Namely, can you make X, Y, and Z be simultaneously whole numbers and be the lengths of the sides of a right angle triangle? And of course, there's many triples like this. There's 3 4 5 12 13 work 161 240 289 and so on. And so then the next natural question is are there infinitely many such Pythagorean triples? And the answer to that turns out to be yes as well. Because for any two whole numbers s and t you can form a Pythagorean triple using this equation here. And all Pythagorean triples are obtained this way up to rescaling um all three numbers by some the same constant. All right. Um so this is an example of a diopantine equation. By this I mean an equation in an algebraic equation maybe polomial equation for which you try and find whole number solutions. And there have been lots of other Dophantine equations that have fascinated humanity over centuries. And I'm just going to give you a few more examples just to get a feeling for it. There's this one um x^2 say -7 y^2 = 1. This is misattributed to pel but in fact it was studied by Indian mathematicians as early as the 7th century AD. And this equation turns out to have infinitely many solutions over the integers. Um the way that you get these solutions is first you find the smallest solution given by x is 33, y is 8 and then you generate all the other solutions from this one using a multiplicative property. And kind of the easiest way to see this multiplicative property is to leave the integers or the rational numbers and go to a quadratic extension by adjoining the irrational number square of 17. So in Q a join square of 17 you can make sense of 33 + 8 17 and then you look at all of its integer powers and the coefficients the kind of the rational part and the coefficient of uh the square root of 17 together give you all possible solutions to this equation. you get infinitely many of them because their absolute value increases. Um there's another equation that's um say known as Mordell's equation. x cubed = y^2 + 2. This is another um example of a diaphantine equation. But unlike the previous ones, this one only has finitely many integer solutions. In fact, it only has two solutions. um given by x is uh 3 and y is plus or minus 5. And the way that you might solve this equation, say if you were taking a first class in number theory, would be again to leave the rational numbers and go to an extension of the rational numbers. Look at q adjoined this time the imaginary number square root of minus2. Turns out you can do arithmetic within the ring of integers of this quadratic of this imaginary quadratic field. There's a unique factorization property that mirrors the unique factorization of the integers. And using that you can prove that these are the only two solutions. All right. And one more example of a dapophantine equation and this really did fascinate people for centuries is Ferma's equation. So in 1637, Pierre de Ferma inspired by Pythagoras's equation x^2 + y^2= z ^2 considered the case x to the n + y= z to the n where n is greater than or equal to 3. and he conjectured or sort of he kind of confidently wrote on the margin of a page that this has no non-trivial solutions where x, y and z are all whole numbers. Right? So you can have a trivial solution by setting one of them to be equal to zero but outside of this there shouldn't be any solutions. All right. So these are equations, polomial equations that you try and solve in whole numbers. Uh but this talk isn't really just about number theory but rather it's about arithmetic geometry. So the idea is to try and view um these equations as giving rise to geometric objects and study uh the solutions to these equations using geometry. So somehow the arithmetic part has to do with the fact that your coefficients of the equations are given by whole numbers and you're looking for integer or rational solutions but you want to kind of look at them using geometry. And so the first one kind of geometrically defines a conic curve and it's isomorphic to P1 um one-dimensional projective space or if you want you can think of it as the reman sphere. The second one turns out to be a twisted form of the multiplicative algebraic group GM and that in some sense ex explains the multiplicative property of the solutions to this equation. Um the third one Mell's equation if you projectivize it so you add a point at infinity this gives rise to an elliptic curve and I'm going to come back to this very soon. Uh the fourth one, FMA's equation gives rise to a curve that's more complicated in a way that we'll make precise soon. This is called the Ferma curve. All right. So we're going to leave Dopantine equations and start talking about algebraic curves. And here um sort of mathematicians in different areas have observed that they kind of fall algebraic curves fall into three classes and and their behavior is different according to which of these classes they fall into. And I'm going this is this is often referred to as the fundamental tricotomy for curves. And I'm going to explain this tricotomy the from the point of view of arithmetic geometry from the point of view of the behavior of rational points. But I'll I'll mention some other perspectives as well. So I'm going to start with a number field K. That's going to be my number field throughout this talk. um you can take it to be the field of rational numbers or you could take it to be any finite extension of the rational numbers that you get by joining an algebraic number. So for instance you could look at quadratic extension q adjoin square 17 that is a real quadratic field or you could look at the imaginary quadratic field q a jojo adjoin square minus2 or whatever your favorite number field might be and over this we're going to want to take a nice curve. So a nice curve is going to be a curve that um is smooth projective and geometrically connected. So maybe I won't give the precise definitions, but roughly you want something that's cut out by some equations from projective space. That's the projective um assumption. You want the curve to be smooth. Um so you don't want to have any cusps or self intersections or points where um you can't define a natural tangent line to the curve. um and you want the curve to be connected over your ground field K and in fact to stay connected even when you go to an algebraic closure like Qbar. Okay. So for a nice curve like this um I claim that the behavior of rational points fits within a fundamental tricotomy which is governed by the genus of the curve. So the genus is an invariant attached to the curve that measures the geometric complexity and you can define it in different ways depending on how you like to think about math. So for instance there is a topological notion of genus where you replace your curve with a remon surface and then it's given by the number of holes that this remon surface has or um there is a geometric notion of genus that is defined as the dimension of the space of differentials on the curve. And again here you could think about holomorphic differentials on the reman surface or you could take algebraically defined differentials over your original ground field K. All right. So this is going to be our fundamental invariant the genus of the curve. And now there's there's kind of three classes. There's the case of a curve of genus zero. So if that's the case, then our curve is a conic curve. It's cut out from um the projective plane by a homogeneous quadratic equation. And so there's two things that can happen. It could happen that the curve simply has no points over your ground field K. But if it has even one point then in fact you can show that the curve is isomeorphic to P1. It's isomeorphic to say the reman sphere. Um and then in that case the number of rational points on your curve is infinite like the number of rational points on P1 on one-dimensional projective space. And so this is the example of the Pythagorean equation that we've seen. So x^2 + y^2 = z ^2. This is a homogeneous quadratic equation and it defines a smooth projective conic and the parameterization that we saw earlier um for describing Pythagorean triples can in fact be interpreted as giving an isomeorphism from P1 to this particular conic curve and so we recover the result that there are infinitely many Pythagorean triples. All right, more interesting is the case of genus one. So the case of genus one um again fits within kind of two classes. It could again happen that your curve simply has no point defined over your original ground field K. Um but if it has a point then your curve is isomeorphic to something called an elliptic curve. and over the complex numbers this is just a one-dimensional complex taurus that's the associated remon surface if the curve has no points over your original ground field then it's kind of a twisted form of an elliptic curve but it does become isomeorphic to an elliptic curve up to some extension okay so here's a picture of an elliptic curve and I I drew it in such a way that you can sort of see well the the way that maybe I want you to think about it if you haven't encountered an elliptic curve before is as a complex Taurus quotient of the complex plane by a rank two lattice. And somehow this this is going to be our our kind of approximation for what is an elliptic curve. And from that perspective, you can see that the elliptic curve has a group structure that's just induced from the addition on the complex plane. Just addition modulo the lattice that you're taking a quotient by. But something really important in this case is that this group law on the elliptic curve is actually an algebraic group law and it's even defined over the ground field K. So you can write down addition of points on your elliptic curve by an algebraic formula um that has coefficients in k. All right. And so in this case if x is an elliptic curve then the set of rational points really has the structure of an aelion group because of this uh group law and then it is a finitely generated aelion group. The finite generation is this theorem of morell that you've heard about. Um and then still there's two things that can happen here. It could happen that the curve um has finite or infinitely many points. So for example, Mell's equation that I wrote down earlier for you by adding a point at infinity, you can view it as an elliptic curve. And then this elliptic curve has infinitely many rational points. They're generated by the integral point 35 that we found. But any multiple of this point is going to define a rational point. And none of these are torsion. And so there are infinitely many points. The rank um of the group of rational points over Z is one. On the other hand, um it can be that some elliptic curves really only have finitely many points over your ground field. So for example I could change the equation and and take this one instead and then the group of rational points on this one this is something one can compute is uh isomeorphic to z mod 5z so it's entirely torsion and it's finite and so this is a case where there are a lot of open questions um still remaining about elliptic curves for example it's not currently known whether the ranks of elliptic curves over Q are bounded or unbounded. Something else a very deep conjecture in arithmetic geometry says it's called the Burton Swin and Dire conjecture. This predicts that um the rank of the elliptic curve can be read off from analytic properties of some associated analytic object called an L function. So this is a a very interesting case to study, but I'm not going to talk about it much more except that I want to kind of preserve the intuition for what an elliptic curve looks like and apply it to higher dimensional um aelion varieties that we're going to encounter soon. So the next case that's the case where we're really um interested in understanding what's going on for this lecture is the famous uh conjecture of morell proved by fault things about 60 years after it was formulated. So if you start out with a nice curve over a number field that has genus greater than or equal to two then the set of rational points on this curve is always finite. Right? So this is the big theorem. Um, I was thinking that maybe a good thing to do would be to just give some huristic for why why might be this be something that you can reasonably expect and here's an answer. So again, it could happen that your curve simply has no rational points at all. But as soon as the curve does have a rational point, so as soon as this set of rational points is non- empty, there is a construction that embeds this curve into a higher dimensional algebraic variety, namely the Jacobian of the curve X. So the Jacobian of X is an Aelian variety of dimension G equal to the genus of our original curve. And then this this map uses our rational point our chosen rational point as a base point and embeds the curve X into the Jacobian. And this map is actually known as the Abel Jacobi map. Now generalization of Mordella's theorem proved by Vy shows that the group of rational points on an aelion variety is always finitely generated and also the curve the original curve of genus G greater than or equal to two sits inside the Jacobian inside this higher dimensional Aelian variety as something of positive co-dimension. So it's reasonable to expect that it might only intersect um this group of rational points in some finite set. It's unlikely that the intersection of X, this positive co-dimension subvariety inside the Jacobian would intersect this finitely generated group in more than finitely many points. All right. So that's that's kind of why why you might expect that this is reasonable. People have tried I guess for 60 years as you've heard people tried um to make this reasoning work in order to obtain an actual proof but I guess it it didn't work out and and then the theorem was proved by different methods by fault things and then eventually Voitar returned to this idea. All right. And before I tell you a bit more about the mathematics that went into the proof of this conjecture, I want to tell you a kind of a sample application. Remember the FMA curve x to the n + y to the n= z to the n which was conjectured to not have any integral um or rational points at all. So this has genus given by the formula n * n - 2 n -1 * n -2 / 2 and as soon as n is greater than or equal to 4 you get the inequality that the genus is greater than or equal to two and so for each fixed n greater than or equal to four fings's theorem implies that there are at most finitely many counter examples to ferm's last theorem and this was by far the strongest result that was known um about FMA's last theorem at the time in 1983 after this conjecture had been open for hundreds of years. Um but of course falting's theorem is about much more than this very specific family of curves namely the FMA curves. It's really a general result about all curves of genus G greater than or equal to two. Okay. And maybe before I move on um yeah I I I want to tell you well okay I want to spend some time discussing faultings as proof. And so when you look at the proof today, it seems as if um he's just knocking off conjectures, major conjectures in arithmetic geometry as if they are dominoes. So the proof does much more than prove the Mell conjecture. It proves a lot of other deep conjectures that were um open at the time. Fing's proof uses a series of reductions that transform the problem and each of the reductions is a fascinating step in itself. So there is the original morell conjecture and then the the first reduction is to something called the shaferevage conjecture. The chauffeurich conjecture is a finitnessess result that you can think of as some higher dimensional generalization of a classical result from analytic number theory from algebraic number theory known as the hermit manowski theorem. So maybe I'll tell you about this classical theorem first. It says that if you look at a number field and um you look for extensions of that number field of bounded degree and that are only allowed to be ramified at finitely many primes at a fixed set of finitely many primes then there are only finitely many such extensions. So the shaarevich conjecture for curves can be thought of as some one-dimensional generalization of this result. It says there are only finitely many isomorphism classes of smooth projective genus G greater than or equal to two curves over the number field K that have good reduction. In other words, that have a a smooth integral model outside a fixed finite set of places of K. Um, and you've heard before that this implies the morell conjecture via the codera parian construction. Maybe I will just repeat it because sometimes it's good to hear things um said more than once. So if you have finitely many points, finitely many R sorry um if you have the set of rational points on your curve X, you can construct a finite to one map from that set to a set of curves of genus maybe some genus G primed that is bigger than the original genus that you start with but that is still bounded. And the way that you construct this finite to1 map is via this codera partion construction you end up with a curve that covers your original curve and that ramifies only at a fixed rational point. Now the reason that this map from rational points on your original curve to covers of your curve of bounded genus. The reason this map is finite to one is um already can be seen on the level of a geometric result that is known as def francis' theorem. So this tells you that if you have two compact remon surfaces of genus greater than or equal to two then there are only finitely many non-constant morphisms between these remon surfaces. And so as a result of this, you can kind of recover your rational point or at least kind of up to finitely many choices from the cover that is rammified just because you have finitely many morphisms to your original curve x. All right. Um now there's a further reduction to another um statement in the same style the same kind of finitness result but this time not for curves but rather for higher dimensional aelion varieties. The shavearevage conjecture for a billion varieties predicts there should be only finitely many isomorphism classes of principally polarized aelion varieties of dimension greater than or equal to two and with good reduction outside a fixed finite set of places of k. The connection between the chaferevage conjecture for aelian varieties and the chaarevage conjecture for curves goes via jacobians. And there's a theorem of tolli that tells you that you can recover um the original curve from its Jacobian if it's equipped with a bit of extra structure which is the structure of a principal polarization. And this is something that again works in uh genus G greater than or equal to two. All right. Um so this reduces the morell conjecture to a finitness result for isomorphism classes of a billion varieties over a number field and with some good reduction smooth model outside a fixed finite set of places. Now the next step is to break up this isomorphism result uh sorry this finitness on the level of isomorphism classes into two pieces and one of these pieces is to consider kind of something coarser than isomorphism classes is to consider isogyny classes of a billion varieties. So an a billion variety of dimension G just up to some very rough approximation you can think of it as a complex Taurus of dimension G. So some quotient of C to the G by a rank 2G lattice. There are the kind of the morphisms between aelion varieties that are that are really important are called isogynes. Those are group homorphisms that are sjective and have a finite kernel. And you can think of these morphisms as coming from commensurable lises on the level of complex toi. So somehow the strategy is to first look at isogyny classes of a billion varieties. And it turns out that you can use these morphisms to define an equivalence relation on aelion varieties and look within isogyny classes within kind of commensurable latises or aelion varieties that are related by isogynies and then one proves a finitness result just for how many isogyny classes there are. That's one step. In order to do this, Fings uses um the GAWA representation on the tape module of an Aelian variety. So just to give you a sense for what this is, the Aelian variety has a group law just like in the elliptic curve case. This group law is defined over the original ground field K. And so then if you look at the L to the N torsion point on the Aelian variety then abstractly this looks like Z mod L to the NZ to the 2G. Uh but on the other hand as you kind of find these torsion points you end up solving algebraic equations and so their coordinates are algebraic over K and so they have an action of the absolute GAWA group of K. So this is where the GA representation comes from. You can let n go to infinity you get compatible structures and that's what gives rise to the tape module. So for instance over here the tate module is a 2g dimensional vector space over the field ql the field of elatic numbers. This is a completion of the rational numbers that you get by using a different kind of norm from the usual norm um that you're maybe used to which is um you know the usual absolute value where the corresponding completion that you get is the field of real numbers. Instead you can define an absolute value where two rational numbers are close if there are congrent modulo a high power of l and the completion with respect to that gives you this field ql and so it's a vector space of dimension 2g over this field and together with this extra symmetry coming from the action of a gawa group the absolute gawa group of k. So falting proves two fundamental results about tate modules of a billion varieties. One is he proves that this galwa representation is in fact a semi-simple representation of this group. So it's a direct sum of its irreducible subrepresentations. And that's really important for for getting some finitness because you you could imagine this sort of thing failing if you had an infinite class of extensions between two irreducibles. And so this semi-simplicity is really important for getting a finitness result. And then another major result um on its own is a case of the Tate conjecture for homorphisms between aelion varieties. So this says that a homorphism between the tape modules that is equivariant for the two gala actions on the tape modules actually comes from an isogyny on the level of a billion varieties. Um so this is a special case of a major conjecture in arithmetic geometry that is known as the tape conjecture and it's it's one of the few cases that is known is the case of a billion varieties um where you're looking at homorphisms between them. All right so these are major results on their own and they are key to prove finitness for isogeny classes of a billion varieties. The idea is to relate this finitness to um finitness on the level of GAWA representations. There on the level of gowir representations, one can bound the number of possible GAWA representations from semi-simplicity combined with some other ingredients. there's this um classical result of Hermit Minkowski that I mentioned that somehow shows up here and then there's a bound coming from the Vay conjectures. All right, but I want to say a word about um how these two results are proved and you already saw in professor Fing's talk that these are results that were known for a billion varieties over finite fields due to the work of Tate. However, what happens is that Tate used crucially that it was known it is known over finite fields that there are finitely many isomorphism classes of a billion varieties. Whereas in this setting over number fields this is a result that you know we're after trying to get this kind of finitness on the level of isomorphism classes of a billion varieties. So one thing that's important is that Tate's argument in fact really only requires this kind finitness within a fixed isogyny class. And so this kind of brings us to the second half of the argument which is finitness within an isogyny class. Right? So we're looking for finitness of isomorphism classes of a billion varieties and you can separate it into a finitness result for isogyny classes and then a finitness result within each fixed isogyny class. Once you have finitness within each fixed isogyny class, this in fact will feed into these major results which in turn will prove the finitness of the number of isogyny classes. Okay. Finitness within a fixed isogyny class comes from heights. So the idea is you have to have some kind of mechanism that produces finitness and this comes from the nor so-called northcot property of projective spaces. There's some height function which is a function say from the qbar points on your projective space to the real numbers and which has this kind of finitness property. So if you bound the height function and you bound the degree over the field over which your point is defined then you should get a finite set. So for example, if you're just looking at rational numbers in PN and uh n dimensional projective space, then you can define a height function just by writing your point in terms of coordinates that are integers and relatively prime. And then you take the maximum of the absolute values of these coordinates and maybe take a logarithm to define a logarithmic height function. So this is something that measures somehow the arithmetic complexity of the point on projective space. Um there's a height machine that extends this kind of finitness property to any projective variety. any variety that's cut out by equations from projective space as long as it's equipped with an ample line bundle. And somehow the the height function only depends on this additional choice which is maybe technical and you don't have to worry about it for now. But somehow on projective varieties you can extend from this definition over here. You can extend um to get a naive height function that has this kind of finitness property that we're after. The problem is that it's not clear to how to relate this to a billion varieties and especially how to measure how the height changes within an isogyny class uh of a billion varieties. And this is where this fault's height comes in. So this is a different notion of height that is defined intrinsically from the datim of an aelion variety and that measures the arithmetic complexity of the aelion variety. And so its definition somehow uses an integral model. I'm giving you an example in the case of an elliptic curve. you can take kind of the best possible integral model which is the neuron model of an elliptic curve and then there's some integral choice um you look at relative differentials on the neuron model and then there's some metric at infinity where you take a generator for this space of differentials and you integrate against the elliptic curve over the complex numbers number this gives a height function on the level of the elliptic curve curve that is an arithmetic invariant of the elliptic curve. More generally, one can define a notion of a height function on a billion varieties using neuron models and using u perspective coming from archelov theory. So the idea is that you want to have an integral model over the ring of integers in your number field, but you also want to have a metric that comes from integrating differentials at the infinite places of K. And together um this give you some interesting arithmetic information about the Aelian variety. Now we've talked about a naive height that has a finitness property and we've talked about this fault's height which is intrinsic to the aelion variety. So it turns out that in order to get finitness on the level of fault things height to get some kind of finitness for a set of aelion varieties with bounded height you need to be able to compare these two different height functions. And so to do this it turns out that the right perspective is to consider a billion varieties not just as themselves but really a modulized space of a billion varieties. This modulized space turns out to not be compact. There are kind of points that escape towards infinity and so that that causes some trouble for comparing height functions. And so there is a solution that's actually quite a nice solution and that involves some later work of professor folings that I want to mention. So it's an ahistorical perspective but I think it's important because it really clarifies things. Um the modulized space of a billion varieties is not itself compact but it has two compactifications constructed uh for which integral models were constructed by faultings and chai. One of these is a tooidal compactification which has um moduli interpretation in terms of degenerations of a billion varieties really in terms of something called semiabelian varieties and the other compact. So that's that's this one up here. This is smooth and has a modular interpretation. The one down here is usually singular and it doesn't have a modular interpretation, but it carries an ample line bundle. And so it kind of there's a good you you can work with the naive height here. But what happens is that you can also compare these two compactifications. So over this one here you have a moduli problem and you have a hodge theoretic bundle that comes from this moduli interpretation. Whereas over here there's a very ample line bundle that comes from an embedding into projective space. And furthermore these two structures down here and up here are compatible in some precise way. And so using that one can endow this line bundle over here with some metric and make sense of the archelov degree in this setting and then this can in turn be compared with a naive height function and then one can establish a northcot property for the fing's height. All right. Um so I want to say a few more things about what came after the proof of moral. And really the big um kind of point that I want you to take away is that arithmetic geometry really blossomed due to all the ideas that professor folings introduced through his proof of mell. There's the idea of working with modulized spaces um and moduliz theoretic techniques in order to study rational points on varieties. There's um aracelloo theoretic techniques. There's um construction of codera parion. All of these things became fundamental tools. And as you've heard before, Voit gave a new proof of the Mell conjecture based on Dopantine approximation. And then folks built on Voit's ideas in fact to prove a vast generalization of the Mordell conjecture that is known as the Mordell Lang conjecture. The morel lang conjecture says that if you start out with an aelion variety and you take a closed subvariety X inside of it and then separately you take some finitely generated subgroup of the group of Qbar points on your aelion variety then the zeroriski closure of this intersection has to be a finite union of translates of a billion subvarieties of A and then these translates necessarily have to be included included in your original variety X. So maybe you don't quite have time to process this, but I I'll just say that somehow the idea is that you have some kind of finitely generated subgroup of special points and this finitely generated subgroup of special points should only be contained sort of should only be zeriski closed inside some subvariety if there is some deep structural reason for that. So it should not happen randomly but it should only happen for some deep structural reason which is the fact that this arissi closure is a union of translates of a billion subvarieties of A. And here's a short explanation for why this indeed is a vast generalization of the morell conjecture. You can take a curve of genus G greater than or equal to two and then you can take the Aelian variety to be the Jacobian of the curve. If your curve has at least one point, you can embed the curve inside this higher dimensional jacobian. And then you can take gamma your finitely generated subgroup of the group of Qbar points to be just the kr rational points of the aelion variety. As you take the intersection, you exactly recover the kr rational points of x. And then this conjecture once proved tells you that well X would have to contain translates of a billion subvarieties of A. But X is just a curve. So the only way that it could contain an aelion subvariety of A would be if that a billion subvariety was really an elliptic curve was onedimensional. But then X is a curve of genus greater than or equal to two. If you assume that it's connected or geometrically connected then it cannot it simply cannot contain an elliptic curve which has genus one. All right. Um so this indeed vastly generalizes the um morell conjecture and this point of view led to kind of the development of an entire framework within arithmetic geometry around unlikely intersections where somehow special points should only be zeriski dense inside subvvarieties of some bigger variety if that happens for some deep structural reason. And I've picked some examples of more recent developments within arithmetic geometry where the ideas introduced by professor fings played a key role. one of these and I just picked kind of my favorite examples but someone else giving this talk might have picked different examples but so the fing's height this invariant of a billion varieties was used crucially in the proof of something called the andreort conjecture this andreort conjecture is a conjecture for uh moduli spaces like ag or more general shimura varieties and it's this kind of unlikely intersection conjecture so fault 's height was used crucially to make progress and ultimately um ideas led to a full proof of this conjecture in recent years by pil shankar and simmerman. There was a new proof of the Mell conjecture due to Lawrence and Venitesh. This doesn't use a billion varieties or heights, but it does use a lot of the tools used in the original proof of the mortal conjecture by professor folings. In particular, it uses piotic gowir representations, the variation of gowir representations in families and it uses piatic hodgej theory which is an area that professor falting developed as well and that's something that you're going to hear about in one of the talks this afternoon and finally I want to pick something from my the kind of the area of my own area of research which is the Langland's program. So these compactified integral models of AG pioneered in the work of Falting and Chai are basically used all the time in current work on the Langland's program. And so a famous result that maybe you've heard of is Schultz's theorem that constructs GAWA representations attached to in the homology of arithmetic hyperbolic three manifolds. This kind of theorem crucially goes through the compactifications that were constructed and pioneered in this work of faultings and chai. All right. Thank you very much for your attention. >> Thank you very much Anna. We have time for a couple of questions from the audience. >> So thanks for the beautiful lecture. So uh I understand this is model V conjecture uh generalizes model conjecture but uh the model conjecture so it's about finness of points but you can also say that the rational points is not sariski dense so I'm wondering in higher dimensional variety or if there is a analog conjecture like not inside a billion varieties but maybe under some condition which generalize higher genus condition that uh the rational points is not risky dense Right. There there are various generalizations like that was one of the kind of big impacts of this proof of mortal lang was to develop um kind of a whole framework around unlikely intersections. And so if instead of working with an Aelian variety, for instance, you were working with a Shimura variety like this moduli space AG, then then in some sense some analog of this um Mel Lang conjecture is the Andre Orort conjecture where kind of the special points are no longer rational points on the Aelian variety, but they're really kind of CM points inside AG coming from a billion varieties with complex multiplication. And then these should not be zerrisky dense inside AG. Uh they should not be zisky dense inside some subvariety in AG except if that happens for some special reason. In the case of the um Andre or conjecture the reason is that this subvariety is really a shimura subvariety. Um and then there's other kind of conjectures within arithmetic geometry that aim to generalize this. And I think there's probably people in the audience who know this area better than me. But um there there's a whole kind of there's conjectures of bokeamolov about um varieties being of generic type and varieties of generic type whatever that means should for them the kind of the rational points should not be so risky dense within this and there's conjectures of voya and so on. So, so there's a lot of like a huge framework of conjectures um that kind of go in this direction. >> So, this varieties of generic type is supposed to generalize these curves with higher gen. >> Yes, that's right. >> Okay. Thank you.