Quantum Mechanics of the Inverse Cube Force Law
In the
last episode
of my column in
Notices of the American Mathematical Society
, we looked at a particle moving in an attractive central force whose strength is proportional to the inverse cube of the distance from the origin.   Among other things, we saw that a particle moving in such a force can spiral in to the origin in a finite time.  But that was classical mechanics.    What about quantum mechanics?
Here things get more tricky. The uncertainty principle tends to prevent the particle from falling in to the origin. But when the attractive force is strong enough, the particle can still fall in. We can make up a theory where the particle shoots back out, but there are choices involved: we need to say how the particle changes phase when it shoots back out. So there is not just a single theory, but many!
Why does the particle come back out?  There are theories where it does not. In these theories, at least those studied so far, time evolution is nonunitary: that is, the probability of finding the particle somewhere or other does not stay equal to
because the particle simply disappears when it hits the origin. Here we focus on theories where time evolution is unitary and the particle comes back out. Many people have written about these, running into ‘paradoxes’ when they weren’t careful enough. Only rather recently have things been straightened out.
Let us dig into the details. In quantum mechanics, the Hilbert space of states of a particle in
is
In a central force whose strength is proportional to
such a particle has a Hamiltonian of this form:
The first term describes the particle’s kinetic energy, while the second describes its potential energy: remember, taking the gradient of an inverse square potential gives an inverse cube force. I have set some constants to
to remove irrelevant clutter, but we need the constant
to say how strong the force is. When
the force is attractive.
In this game, analysis is paramount. We should interpret
as a densely defined linear operator on
For this, we choose a dense linear subspace
and treat
as a linear map from
to
Different choices of
correspond to different physical assumptions: for example, assumptions about what happens when the particle falls into the origin.
To get unitary time evolution in quantum mechanics, we need the Hamiltonian to be self-adjoint. But adjoints of densely defined operators are tricky. Let us briefly recall how they work. Given a Hilbert space
and a linear operator
from a dense linear subspace
to
we define
to be the set of all
for which there exist
such that
If such a vector
exists, it is unique, and it depends linearly on
Thus, for
we define
to be the vector
with the above property. The
adjoint
of
is then the linear operator
We say
is
self-adjoint
if
We say that
is
essentially self-adjoint
if it has a unique extension to a self-adjoint operator. If it does, this extension must be
All this raises the question of whether the Hamiltonian
for the inverse cube force law can be made self-adjoint with a suitable choice of domain. It turns out we can always do it, but sometimes in more than one way. There are three regimes:
•
In this case we can start with the domain
consisting of smooth functions that are compactly supported on
minus the origin. The operator
is unambiguously defined on this domain, and it is essentially self-adjoint.
•
In this case
is still well-defined on the domain
but it is
not
essentially self-adjoint. In fact, it admits more than one self-adjoint extension! However,
is
bounded below
: there is a constant
such that
for all
Physically, this means that the particle’s energy is bounded below by
Mathematically, this implies that
has a canonical choice of self-adjoint extension called the ‘Friedrichs extension’, with the smallest possible domain.  But there is another canonical choice, the ‘Krein extension’, with the largest possible domain.
•
In this case
is well-defined on the domain
and it has more than one self-adjoint extension, but it is not bounded below.
These strange results demand explanation. For example, what is special about
? In classical mechanics, the energy of a particle in the inverse cube force ceases to be bounded below as soon as
Quantum mechanics is different. To get a lot of negative potential energy, the particle’s wavefunction must be peaked near the origin, but that gives it kinetic energy. The tradeoff is captured by
Hardy’s inequality
. This says that for any
we have
This is why
is bounded below when
On the other hand, the constant
in Hardy’s inequality cannot be improved, so if
we can find
with
Then we can use a remarkable property of the
potential to show that
is not bounded below. Namely,
has a kind of symmetry under dilations. You can guess this by noting that both the Laplacian and
have units of 1/length
2
.  Indeed, if you take any smooth function
dilate it by a factor of
and then apply
you get
times what you get if you do these operations in the other order. This implies that if
we can dilate
and get a function obeying the same equation with
replaced by
Thus, as soon as
can be negative, it can be made arbitrarily large and negative by choosing
to be very small. Thus
is not bounded below.
Next, what is special about
? This is more subtle.  For any value of
we can find spherically symmetric solutions of
on
that are nonzero and smooth. When
and only in this case, some of these solutions
lie in
This dooms the chance of
being essentially self-adjoint, because it implies
If
were essentially self-adjoint
would be self-adjoint, and it is easy to see that a self-adjoint operator cannot have
as an eigenvalue.
When
the operator
has more than one self-adjoint extension from
to some larger domain. To classify these we can use separation of variables, writing
as a sum of a radial part and an angular part, assuming the angular dependence of
is given by a spherical harmonic
and doing a change of variables
to reduce
to the ordinary differential operator
on the half-line
We can completely classify self-adjoint extensions of this differential operators from
to larger domains; the answer depends on
and
A choice of self-adjoint extension is a choice of boundary conditions at
and this says how the phase of an incoming wave changes as it reflects off the origin and bounces back. Finally, we can assemble the results for different spherical harmonics to classify self-adjoint extensions of
There exist many self-adjoint extensions of
that respect the rotational symmetry of the inverse cube force law, but for
the extension must break the dilation symmetry discussed above. This is what physicists call an ‘anomaly’: a symmetry of a classical system that fails to be a symmetry of the corresponding quantum system. But intriguingly, for some still lower values of
one can choose a Hamiltonian that is symmetrical under a
discrete subgroup
of dilations!  Determining precisely which values these are seems to be an open problem.
To explore the quantum mechanics of the inverse cube force law more thoroughly, I recommend first this:
• S. Gopalakrishnan,
Self-Adjointness and the Renormalization of Singular Potentials
, B.A. Thesis, Amherst College, 2006.
then this:
• D. M. Gitman, I. V. Tyutin and B. L. Voronov,
Self-adjoint extensions and spectral analysis in Calogero problem
.
and finally this:
• J. Dereziński and S. Richard,
On Schrödinger operators with inverse square potentials on the half-line
,
Ann. Henri Poincaré
18
(2017), 869–928.
The first is an excellent overview of problems associated to singular potentials, including the inverse cube force. The second delves into self-adjoint extensions of the ordinary differential operators mentioned above, and the third works them out with exquisite thoroughness.
Related
This entry was posted  on Friday, May 1st, 2026 at 3:22 pm and is filed under
mathematics
,
physics
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the
RSS 2.0
feed.
											You can
leave a response
, or
trackback
from your own site.
Post navigation
« Previous Post
Next Post »
You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked
*
Comment
*
Name
*
Email
*
Website
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ