Carlos Kenig, joined later by Thomas Duyckaerts, developed the powerful channels of energy technique coupled with the concentration compactness method . With Yvan Martel and Pierre Raphael, he revealed how singularities form in the KdV type equation (which describes various wave phenomena from shallow waves to rogue waves). Perhaps most remarkable is his work on the nonlinear version of the famous Schrödinger equation from quantum physics. In early work, he made a complete classification of all the ways this equation’s solutions can blow up. Later he proved, with Pierre Raphael, Igor Rodnianski, and Jérémie Szeftel, that the defocusing version of the equation – long believed to be inherently stable – can in fact blow up in finite time. This highly surprising result exploited an unexpected connection to fluid dynamics : it helped to resolve a major open problem, identifying smooth solutions to the compressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations where the fluid’s density and velocity become infinite – representing a complete breakdown of the fluid description. Throughout his career, Merle’s insights have overturned fundamental assumptions in the field, forged deep connections between mathematics and physics, and opened new avenues toward some of the most celebrated unsolved problems. Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics Across more than six decades, scientists and engineers from three “ muon g-2 ” collaborations, representing dozens of institutions, have pushed experimental precision ever higher in pursuit of a single, very significant number: the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon . The muon is a heavy, unstable cousin of the electron, and like the electron it can behave like a tiny magnet. The physicists are looking to capture how the muon's magnetic strength is subtly affected by the “foam” of virtual particles constantly popping in and out of empty space around it. Measuring the muon’s magnetism and comparing it to theoretical predictions allows physicists to test whether any unknown particles or forces are hidden in this foam. In other words, to probe for new physics beyond the Standard Model, our most successful theory of particles and forces. The CERN collaboration’s pioneering storage ring experiments of the 1960s and 1970s first measured the anomalous magnetic moment with meaningful precision. Then in the 1990s, Brookhaven National Laboratory ’s reimagining of the experiment achieved a major improvement in precision. And after the audacious transportation of Brookhaven's 50-ton, 15-meter-diameter storage ring 3,200 miles by road and barge to Fermilab in 2013, the experiment was systematically refined to achieve a final precision of 127 parts per billion – a mind-boggling 30,000 times more precise than the first g-2 experiment in 1965. The results had shown a tantalizing discrepancy with the value predicted by theory ; and in 2023, Fermilab’s new results pushed that discrepancy close to the threshold considered evidence for new physics. Since then, the final, even more precise results, compared to newly evolved theoretical calculations narrowed the gap, but considerable uncertainty remains for the moment. Whatever the final verdict, this experiment represents a remarkable theoretical, experimental and technological endeavor, achieving extraordinary precision in the quest for fundamental understanding. Special Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics David J. Gross has been a leading figure in fundamental physics for six decades. In the early 1970s, there was a gap in quantum field theory, our best theory of particles and forces. The theory could not describe or accurately predict the strong nuclear force , which holds the nucleus of the atom together. But in 1973, Gross and his graduate student Frank Wilczek (as well as, independently, David Politzer) solved the mystery. They discovered that the strong force works the opposite way to familiar forces like gravity: it gets weaker as particles approach each other , but stronger as they move apart . This explained why quarks , the particles inside the atomic nucleus, can never escape or be observed in isolation, and it enabled the development of quantum chromodynamics – the theory of the strong force and the final foundation stone of the Standard Model of particle physics. Gross has gone on to make seminal contributions across multiple areas of theoretical physics. For example, he and his collaborators developed a simplified quantum field theory that helped explain how particles can acquire mass; and developed new theoretical approaches attempting to unify all fundamental forces, including gravity, in a single framework known as heterotic string theory . Alongside his theoretical work, Gross has a longstanding record of leadership in the physics community, in roles including Director of the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, and President of the American Physical Society. He has helped establish physics institutes in India, China, and South America. He directed the Jerusalem Winter School in Theoretical Physics and chaired the Solvay Physics Conferences for the last 25 years. In 2025 he was one of the authors of an ambitious 40-year plan for physics on behalf of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. And over the course of his career, he has been a mentor to numerous brilliant students who became leaders themselves, passing on his vision of physics as a collaborative international endeavor. Inaugural Vera Rubin New Frontiers Prize A new physics prize, the Vera Rubin New Frontiers Prize , will be announced during the ceremony, along with the inaugural recipient, Carolina Figueiredo , from Princeton University. One $50,000 prize is awarded this year; from 2027 there will be 3 per year. The prize is named in tribute to the great astronomer Vera Rubin, who discovered key evidence for dark matter, and in homage to whom NVIDIA’s new chip platform is named. The new prize recognizes women physicists within