

Sylvester and Clifford on Curved Space | Azimuth

 

Azimuth

Home
About

 

Sylvester and Clifford on Curved Space

Einstein realized that gravity is due to the curvature of spacetime, but let’s go back earlier:

On the 18th of August 1869, the eminent mathematician 
Sylvester
 gave a speech arguing that geometry is not separate from physics.  He later published this speech in the journal 
Nature
, and added a footnote raising the possibility that space is curved:

  the laws of motion accepted as fact, suffice to prove in a general way that the space we live in is a flat or level space […], our existence therein being assimilable to the life of the bookworm in a flat page; but what if the page should be undergoing a process of gradual bending into a curved form?

Then, even more dramatically, he announced that the mathematician 
Clifford
 had been studying this!

  Mr. W. K. Clifford has indulged in more remarkable speculations as the possibility of our being able to infer, from certain unexplained phenomena of light and magnetism, the fact of our level space of three dimensions being in the act of undergoing in space of four dimensions (space as inconceivable to us as our space to the supposititious bookworm) a distortion analogous to the rumpling of the page.

This started a flame war in letters to 
Nature
 which the editor eventually shut off, saying “this correspondence must now cease”.  Clifford later wrote about his theories in a famous short paper:

• William Clifford, 
On the space-theory of matter
, 
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society
 
2
 (1876), 157–158.

It’s so short I can show you it in its entirety:

Riemann has shewn that as there are different kinds of lines and surfaces, so there are different kinds of space of three dimensions; and that we can only find out by experience to which of these kinds the space in which we live belongs. In particular, the axioms of plane geometry are true within the limits of experiment on the surface of a sheet of paper, and yet we know that the sheet is really covered with a number of small ridges and furrows, upon which (the total curvature not being zero) these axioms are not true. Similarly, he says, although the axioms of solid geometry are true within the limits of experiment for finite portions of our space, yet we have no reason to conclude that they are true for very small portions; and if any help can be got thereby for the explanation of physical phenomena, we may have reason to conclude that they are not true for very small portions of space.

I wish here to indicate a manner in which these speculations may be applied to the investigation of physical phenomena. I hold in fact

(1) That small portions of space are in fact of a nature analogous to little hills on a surface which is on the average flat; namely, that the ordinary laws of geometry are not valid in them.

(2) That this property of being curved or distorted is continually being passed on from one portion of space to another after the manner of a wave.

(3) That this variation of the curvature of space is what really happens in that phenomenon which we call the motion of matter, whether ponderable or etherial.

(4) That in the physical world nothing else takes place but this variation, subject (possibly) to the law of continuity.

I am endeavouring in a general way to explain the laws of double refraction on this hypothesis, but have not yet arrived at any results sufficiently decisive to be communicated.

To my surprise, the following paper argues that Clifford did experiments to 
test
 his ideas by measuring the polarization of the skylight during a solar eclipse in Sicily on December 22, 1870:

• S. Galindo and Jorge L. Cervantes-Cota, 
Clifford’s attempt to test his gravitation hypothesis
.

Clifford did indeed go on such an expedition, and did indeed try to measure the polarization of skylight as the Moon passed the Sun.  I don’t know of any record of him saying why he did it.

I’ll skip everything the above paper says about why the polarization of skylight was interesting and mysterious in the 1800s, and quote just a small bit:

The English Eclipse Expedition set off earlier in December 1870, on the steamship H.M.S. Psyche scheduled for a stopover at Naples before continuing to Syracuse in Sicily.  Unfortunately before arriving to her final call, the ship struck rocks and was wrecked off Catania.  Fortunately all instruments and members of the party were saved without injury.

Originally it was the intention of the expedition to establish in Syracuse their head-quarters, but in view of the wreckage the group set up their base camp at Catania. There the expedition split up into three groups. The group that included Clifford put up an observatory in Augusta near Catania. The leader of this group was William Grylls Adams, professor of Natural Philosophy at King’s College, London.

In a report written by Prof. Adams, describing the expedition, we learn that the day of the eclipse, just before the time of totality, “… a dense cloud came over the Moon and shut out the whole, so that it was doubtful whether the Moon or the clouds first eclipsed the Sun […] Mr. Clifford observed light polarized on the cloud to the right and left and over the Moon, in a horizontal plane through the Moon’s centre [….] It will be seen from Mr. Clifford’s observations that the plane of polarization by the cloud…was nearly at right angles to the motion of the Sun”.

As was to be expected, Clifford’s eclipse observations on polarization did not produce any result.  His prime intention, of detecting angular changes of the polarization plane due to the curving of space by the Moon in its transit across the Sun´s disk, was not fulfilled. At most he confirmed the already known information, i.e. the skylight polarization plane moves at right angles to the Sun anti-Sun direction.

This is a remarkable prefiguring of 
Eddington’s later voyage
 to the West African island of Principe to measure the bending of starlight during an eclipse of the Sun in 1919.   Just one of many stories in the amazing prehistory of general relativity!

Related

					This entry was posted  on Saturday, January 10th, 2026 at 1:55 am and is filed under 
physics
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the 
RSS 2.0
 feed.
											You can 
leave a response
, or 
trackback
 from your own site.
					
					

Post navigation

« Previous Post

Next Post »

6 Responses to 
Sylvester and Clifford on Curved Space

 
Justin
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 4:55 am
 

Perhaps not so surprising that Sylvester (since the more feline aspects of Sylvester’s character could sometimes become quite animated ;) … he withdrew from the University of London as a young 14-year-old student in 1830 after he was accused of threatening another student with a knife, and later after moving from UCL to the University of Virginia as a professor he got into a fight, with weapons, with one of his students, after which both had significant injuries) might not get along so well with a big red dog…

I like this quote by William Barrett Frankland (from the Wikipedia page for Clifford) regarding the preternatural premonition by Clifford of the central concept of GR about which you excellently post: “The boldness of this speculation is surely unexcelled in the history of thought. Up to the present, however, it presents the appearance of an Icarian flight.”  IMO, that quote somewhat encapsulates how Clifford’s outstanding brilliance metaphorically propelled him right up to the Sun, and then how his brilliance and his situation very sadly took its toll on him.

Reply

 
butteryfancy7b95cf93c8
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 7:04 am
 

Clifford died in 1879, the year Einstein was born. If he had lived to 70 rather than 33 he would have seen the 1915 GR work Einstein published.

Reply

 
SirLight
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 8:16 am
 

It is so remarkable how the language changes in this old papers. It is the same english, but at the same time it is definitely not the same english. Not just the “shewn” instead of “shown”, it is word choice in almost every sentence that differs it from today.

Reply

 
John Baez
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 5:00 pm
 

In addition, Sylvester was famous for his verbal hijinks.  He introduced the terms “matrix”, “graph” and “discriminant”, “Jacobian” and “totient” in their modern mathematical meaning, and dozens of others that did not catch on: cyclotheme, meicatecticizant, tamisage…   After retiring in 1870 he lived in London, spending most days at the Athenaeum Club (he had been elected a member of the Club in 1856).  For a while it looked like he might give up mathematics since he published a book poetry: 
The Laws of Verse
.   Clearly Sylvester was proud of this work, since after this he sometimes signed himself “J J Sylvester, author of The Laws of Verse”. But he did return to mathematics…

So, he’s more likely than most of his age to write a phrase like “supposititious bookworm”.   Here’s another passage by him, which I mentioned in my article about his work on 
chemistry and invariant theory
:

  To those unacquainted with the laws of atomicity I recommend Dr. Frankland’s Lecture Notes for Chemical Students, vols. 1 and 2, London (Van Voorst), a perfect storehouse of information on the subject arranged in the most handy order and put together and explained with true scientific accuracy and precision. [….]   The more I study Dr. Frankland’s wonderfully beautiful little treatise the more deeply I become impressed with the harmony or homology (I might call it, rather than analogy) which exists between the chemical and algebraical theories. In travelling my eye up and down the illustrated pages of “the Notes,” I feel as Aladdin might have done in walking in the garden where every tree was laden with precious stones, or as Caspar Hauser when first brought out of his dark cellar to contemplate the glittering heavens on a starry night. There is an untold treasure of hoarded algebraical wealth potentially contained in the results achieved by the patient and long continued labor of our unconscious and unsuspected chemical fellow-workers.

Reply

 
Cris Moore
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 7:45 pm
 

This sounds a bit more like speculation regarding Planck-scale fluctuations than general relativity. But still totally cool.

Cris 

Reply

 
John Baez
 
says:
 

10 January, 2026 at 9:06 pm
 

Indeed, Clifford doesn’t connect spatial curvature to gravity, but rather 
matter
.  It reminds a bit of Einstein’s persistent and failed attempts to explain particles in terms of the gravitational and electromagnetic fields—perhaps what we now call soliton solutions.

In 1935, in his famous paper with Rosen where they found wormholes (or “Einstein-Rosen bridges”), they wrote:

  We see now in the given solution, free from singularities, the mathematical representation of an elementary particle (neutrons or neutrinos).

In 1939, in his popular book with Infeld called “The Evolution of Physics”, they wrote:

  Could we not reject the concept of matter and build a pure field physics? What impresses our senses as matter is really a great concentration of energy into a comparatively small space. We could regard matter as the regions in space where the field is extremely strong. A thrown stone is, from this point of view, a changing field in which the states of the greatest field intensity travel through space with the velocity of the stone.

In 1949, in his “Autobiographical notes”, Einstein wrote:

  If one had the field-equation of the total field, one would be compelled to demand that the particles themselves would everywhere be describable as singularity-free solutions of the completed field-equations. Only then would the general theory of relativity be a complete theory.

Reply

You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it. 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
 
Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*
 
Name 
*
 

Email 
*
 

Website
 

 

 
Notify me of new comments via email.
 
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ

 

latest posts:

Octonions and the Standard Model

Interview with Micah Zarin

Summing the Reciprocals of Primes

From Pentagons to Pentagrams

The Great Icosahedron

What Are Atoms Made Of?

Phasons in Quasicrystals

Naturally Occurring Quasicrystals

Freiman’s Constant

Quantum Mechanics of the Inverse Cube Force Law

latest comments:

allenknutson on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
allenknutson on 
Octonions and the Standard…
BLK on 
Norton’s Dome
walgaterobert on 
Octonions and the Standard…
Phillip Helbig on 
Octonions and the Standard…
mitchellporter on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
John Baez
 on 
Octonions and the Standard…
walgaterobert on 
Octonions and the Standard…
 

How To Write Math Here:

You can 
include math in your comments using LaTeX
,  but you need to do it this way:

$latex  E = mc^2$

You need the word 'latex' right after the first dollar sign, and it needs a space after it.  Double dollar signs don't work, and other limitations apply, some described 
here
.  You can't preview comments here, but I'm happy to fix errors.

Read Posts On:

art
 (8)

astronomy
 (59)

azimuth
 (65)

biodiversity
 (41)

biology
 (114)

carbon emissions
 (80)

chemistry
 (92)

climate
 (162)

computer science
 (80)

conferences
 (113)

culture
 (8)

economics
 (33)

energy
 (51)

engineering
 (12)

epidemiology
 (22)

game theory
 (30)

geography
 (5)

health
 (7)

history
 (21)

information and entropy
 (100)

jobs
 (17)

journals
 (5)

mathematics
 (653)

music
 (55)

networks
 (192)

oceans
 (13)

physics
 (270)

politics
 (2)

probability
 (99)

psychology
 (6)

publishing
 (20)

puzzles
 (14)

quantum technologies
 (28)

questions
 (3)

risks
 (59)

seminars
 (23)

software
 (33)

strategies
 (44)

sustainability
 (76)

the practice of science
 (29)

this week's finds
 (18)

also visit these:

Bit Tooth Energy

Brave New Climate

Do the Math

Dot Earth

Environment 360

Planet3.0

RealClimate

Serendipity

The Science of Doom

Yale Environment 360

RSS feeds:

 
RSS - Posts
 
RSS - Comments

Email Subscription:

Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.

						Email Address:					

 

 

						Sign me up!					

					Join 5,451 other subscribers				

SEARCH:

Search

Blog Stats:

5,558,995 hits

Blog at WordPress.com.

 
Comment						

Reblog

Subscribe

Subscribed

				Azimuth			

Join 5,451 other subscribers

 

												Sign me up											

											Already have a WordPress.com account? 
Log in now.
 

 
Privacy						

 

				Azimuth			

Subscribe

Subscribed

Sign up

Log in

Copy shortlink

										Report this content									

										View post in Reader									

Manage subscriptions

Collapse this bar

Loading Comments...

Write a Comment...

Email (Required)

Name (Required)

Website

 

