AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society

AMS Website Down

Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm. 

PDFLINK

Conversation

Allyn Jackson

When the International Congress of Mathematicians comes to the United States this year, it will be an occasion for celebration, reflection, and unity. To be held July 23rd to 30th in Philadelphia, ICM2026 will provide a showcase for the beauty and depth of mathematics, a forum for considering the role of the field in culture and art, and an opportunity for mathematicians from around the globe to unite around ideals they share.

“A congress like this one, which attracts thousands of people, will show how science, and particularly mathematics, transcends political, cultural, and national divides,” said ICM2026 Organizing Committee member Irene Fonseca of Carnegie Mellon University. Mathematics is based on timeless values like the value of rigorous thinking. “These core values and truths don’t change depending on political views or the political environment,” said Fonseca. “Science and mathematics are very resilient.”

Irene Fonseca, Member, ICM2026 Organizing Committee

Born in Portugal, Irene Fonseca earned her PhD at the University of Minnesota in 1985. Today she is the Kavčić-Moura University Professor of Mathematics at Carnegie Mellon University and serves as a vice-president of the AMS. ICM2026 will provide an occasion to show the general public how mathematics, though often hidden, is in fact ubiquitious in their lives, said Fonseca. “It’s a forum that we hope will explain how mathematics transcends the ivory towers of academia and actually percolates into everybody’s lives.”

1
.

Enthusiasm and Dedication

This resilience can be seen in the 13-person ICM2026 Organizing Committee. “We are putting in all the effort we can to make it the best ICM we possibly can, to make it the best experience for the attendees, make it rewarding, make it memorable” said ICM2026 Organizing Committee member Robert L. Bryant of Duke University. “It’s our responsibility to the international community to give it our best effort.”

Robert L. Bryant, Member, ICM2026 Organizing Committee

Born into a farming family in rural North Carolina, Robert L. Bryant received his PhD in mathematics in 1979 at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. A past AMS president (2015–2016), Bryant is the Phillip Griffiths Distinguished Professor of Mathematics at Duke University. Important advances in mathematics often are understood only by specialists, he said. “The ICM is a chance for the mathematical community to really appreciate some great achievements by hearing great expositions of the work.”

One of the committee’s concerns has been the possibility that travel restrictions might prevent some mathematicians from getting visas to attend the congress. Although these worries have not disappeared, they have eased. A test case came in summer of 2025, when the Mathematical Congress of the Americas was held in Miami, Florida. The MCA organizers reported no major obstacles for international participants to attend. Cautiously hopeful, the ICM2026 organizers continue to monitor developments in US travel policies and have pledged to help solve visa problems if they arise.

An encouraging sign is the rate of acceptance of invitations to speak at ICM2026, which has been a bit higher than for previous congresses. “We have had very few declinations, less than a handful,” said Jalal Shatah of the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York University, who chairs the Organizing Committee. Registrations are tracking with expectations from earlier ICMs, as are submissions for short communications and poster sessions. Shatah noted that economic pressures felt around the world might eventually affect the number of participants. Nevertheless a fairly large gathering of around 5,000 is expected.

The support of the Simons Foundation means that ICM2026 has been largely shielded from concerns about eroding funding for science. In addition, the administrative support of the foundation’s staff, particularly Meghan Fazzi, has greatly facilitated the planning.

Still, the Organizing Committee has had a great deal to do, with monthly meetings of the committee itself, meetings with subcommittees focused on specific tasks, and ad hoc consultations with colleagues and organizations. Talking to the committee members, one feels it is a labor of love, which Shatah confirmed. “Everyone has been very enthusiastic and dedicated,” he said.

For the latest information on the ICM2026 program and to register, visit: 
www.icm2026.org

2
.

An Exciting Scientific Program

Hiraku Nakajima of the Kavli Institute at the University of Tokyo is the current president of the International Mathematical Union (IMU), which oversees the ICM. Back in 1990, when he was a fresh PhD working in differential geometry, Nakajima attended the 1990 ICM in Kyoto and listened to George Lusztig give a plenary lecture on a new geometric approach to representation theory. In Lusztig’s explanation of the concept of a quiver, Nakajima found what he needed in order to understand a new kind of manifold he had discovered, which came to be called a quiver variety. “That was a turning point in my career,” said Nakajima. More than thirty years later, “I am still working on quiver varieties.”

As IMU president, Nakajima plays a mainly advisory role in the planning for ICM2026. He does however have one extremely important job: He serves as chair of the selection committee for the Fields Medals. Gossip about who might get medals always intensifies in the run-up to the congress. Asked about this, Nakajima is a model of discretion and understatement, saying only, “This is a very interesting topic for chatting among mathematicians.”

Another task for Nakajima, in consultation with the IMU Executive Committee, was to appoint the ICM2026 Program Committee. Chaired by Claire Voisin of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (France), the Program Committee crafts the scientific program for the congress, including selecting plenary speakers and appointing panelists to choose invited speakers in the disciplinary sections.

The ICM2026 scientific program shows “we really have made great advances in mathematics” in the time since the previous congress, Nakajima said. “Several conjectures and big problems have been solved recently, and this is very exciting.” A prominent example is the 2024 proof of the geometric Langlands conjecture. “Many people appreciate the Langlands program because it connects many areas in mathematics,” Nakajima commented. Highlighting such connections “is very close to the motivation of the ICM.”

Artificial intelligence (AI) emerges as a theme across the scientific program. While there is no section devoted to this topic, several invited speakers have brought AI tools into their work and are expected to discuss this in their lectures. In addition, the use of AI in mathematics will be the subject of public lectures as well as two afternoons of panel discussions. The latter are being organized by two Penn locals who serve on the ICM2026 Organizing Committee, Jonathan Block and Tony Pantev. “This congress is kind of between worlds,” Pantev remarked. “AI is not properly part of the research community yet, but it’s approaching us, so there is an opportunity to make a connection.”

Jalal Shatah: A War Refugee as ICM2026 Chair

A person of great warmth and ebullience, Jalal Shatah loves being part of the community of mathematicians. He would do anything for his students, for his colleagues near and far, and for his home institution, the Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences at New York University, where he has been on the faculty for forty years.

But heading up the organization of a sprawling, complex, multifaceted event like the International Congress of Mathematicians is not the kind of challenge Shatah has naturally been drawn to. So why did he wind up as chair of the Organizing Committee for the ICM to be held next July in Philadelphia?

“I really felt the urge to give back to the community,” he explained. “I’ve had a good life because of mathematics. And I wanted to do something for the country I came to. I came to the US as a refugee, fleeing civil war when I was 18 years old.”

Born in Tripoli, Lebanon, in 1957, Shatah showed early talent for mathematics. His mother had no schooling and his father stopped school by the fourth grade, but they put high priority on education for their five children. They also deeply admired the United States and its commitment to equality and the rule of law.

When Jalal finished his schooling at the age of 18, he planned to follow in the footsteps of his siblings to study at the American University of Beirut. His plans collapsed when what had looked like occasional skirmishes broke out into full-scale civil war.

Because Jalal and his brother Hasan, who was eight years older, had been outspoken about the political situation, they were targeted by a militia. Hasan had already fled to Kuwait when, one night, militiamen came to the Shatah home looking for Jalal. There was some confusion, as they expected to find someone Hasan’s age, not an 18-year-old kid. With AK-47 rifles pointed at him, Jalal froze, speechless. His other brother Mohamad was present and managed to think quickly. Jalal is in Beirut, Mohamad said.

The militiamen left Jalal alone that night, but he knew his life was still in danger. Not long thereafter, despite blocked roads and widespread random killings in the area, friends managed to smuggle Jalal by car over the border into Syria. He then made his way to Kuwait. Concerned for his younger brother’s safety, Hasan persuaded an official at the US embassy to issue Jalal a student visa to come to the United States, even though Jalal had not been accepted to any college or university. Jalal remembers to this day the exact wording the official used on his visa: “Prospective student, school not selected.”

When Jalal arrived at John F. Kennedy airport in New York, an immigration officer said he could stay one month. Jalal explained that he needed more time to apply and be accepted to a college. Sensing Jalal’s fear, the officer softened. Okay, he said, six months. To this day Jalal is grateful for the generosity of that officer, and the one at the Kuwait embassy. “They saved my life,” he said. “And they gave me the opportunity to be a mathematician.”

With just over 
2000
$\$$
 to start his new life, Jalal chose the University of Texas at Austin, which charged foreign students just 
14
$\$$
 per credit, a sum far smaller than the out-of-state tuition for US citizens. He studied engineering science and mathematics, then went to Brown University to earn master’s and doctoral degrees in applied mathematics. In 1983, he took a postdoc at Courant and joined the faculty there two years later. He has lived ever since in New York City.

His late brother Mohamad also went to the University of Texas, where he earned a doctorate in economics. After working at the International Monetary Fund and serving as the Lebanese ambassador in the US, Mohamad returned to Lebanon in 2008 to serve as finance minister. He was assassinated in 2013 in a car bombing suspected to have been the work of the Hezbollah terrorist group.

Jalal mused on the kindness he encountered on arriving in the United States, saying, “It was so different then.” He wants to keep that kindness alive. “This is what is motivating me, to give back what I have gotten in my life.”

Nakajima emphasized that the planning of the scientific program for ICM2026 was not confined to a small elite. About 160 mathematicians the world over were formally involved as Program Committee or section panel members, and probably another few hundred contributed through informal consultations. As a result, the scientific program is very much a product of the community. “That’s the reason it’s so prestigious to be chosen as an ICM speaker,” said Nakajima. “It’s recognition by the community.” As superficial numerical criteria like citation indicies continue to replace expert judgments in many areas of research and academia, “it’s very important that we mathematicians evaluate ourselves.”

3
.

Ensuring Worldwide Participation

Each ICM draws a substantial proportion of its participants from the host country. Given the tens of thousands of mathematicians in the US, plus many mathematically interested people in aligned fields, American attendance at ICM2026 is expected to be substantial. Supporting this attendance is a program of travel grants for US mathematicians, run by the AMS and funded by the National Science Foundation. Representation of mathematicians from Canada and Mexico is also expected to be high.

Prizes to be Given at ICM2026

Each ICM provides the venue for awarding prestigious prizes sponsored by the International Mathematical Union:

The 
Fields Medal
, for outstanding mathematical achievement in existing work and for the promise of future achievement

The 
Abacus Medal
, for outstanding contributions in mathematical aspects of information sciences

The 
Chern Medal
, for longstanding accomplishments warranting the highest level of recognition

The 
Gauss Prize
, for mathematical research having a major influence outside mathematics (awarded jointly by the IMU and the German Mathematical Society)

The 
Leelavati Prize
, for outstanding contributions for increasing public awareness of mathematics

To ensure that mathematicians from all over the world are represented at the congress, the ICM2026 Organizing Committee created a program of travel grants to support mathematicians from eligible developing countries. With funding from the Simons Foundation and several other organizations, the program was overseen by Organizing Committee member Wilfrid Gangbo of the University of California Los Angeles.

About 2000 applications were submitted through the AMS Math Programs system. Eight regional panels appointed by mathematics organizations reviewed the applications. The 683 grantees who were ultimately chosen received notification in March 2025, to ensure plenty of time for visa applications. In some places getting a visa can take more than a year, said Gangbo. “We hope the rejection rate will be low.”

African by birth, Gangbo knows well the conditions faced by mathematicians in developing countries. Without the travel grants, almost no mathematicians from Africa would attend the ICM, he said. “The cost for one person is more than two months’ salary for many mathematics professors in Africa.” Often such mathematicians earned degrees in the US or Europe but lack opportunities for interactions with international colleagues. Through ICM2026, Gangbo said, “I am hoping they will discover a lot of exciting mathematics.”

Wilfrid Gangbo, Member, ICM2026 Organizing Committee

Born in the West African nation of Benin, Wilfrid Gangbo earned his PhD at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne in 1992. Today he is a professor of mathematics at the University of California, Los Angeles. The strength of the US as a mathematical leader among nations is sometimes taken for granted, he said. With ICM2026 providing a venue to highlight that strength, he said, “We hope it’s going to be conserved.”

4
.

An Array of Cultural Activities

ICM2026 Organizing Committee member John W. Morgan of Columbia University has attended several congresses in his long career. He sees the ICM as a rare opportunity to get a glimpse of mathematics as a whole. “Maybe you have been looking very hard at the local trees in your neighborhood, but it’s nice to step back and see the beauty of the whole forest,” he said. “It can also be quite helpful when you go back and look at your trees again.”

John W. Morgan, Member, ICM2026 Organizing Committee

Born in Philadelphia, John W. Morgan received his PhD from Rice University in 1969. A professor at Columbia University, he is also a member of the Simons Center for Geometry and Physics at Stony Brook University and served as the center’s founding director from 2009 to 2016. The American mathematical community is a “melting pot” of people from around the globe, Morgan said. “In that context, it is great to welcome the entire world mathematical community to the US.”

Morgan’s first ICM was Vancouver in 1974, when he was five years past his PhD. “I got to meet all these luminaries and hear the way they thought about mathematics,” Morgan recalled. It was a chance to “[absorb] what world-class mathematics is, how it operates, what it’s like, what’s in the air.” He especially remembered discussing Hodge theory with Pierre Deligne, who four years later would get a Fields Medal at the 1978 congress in Helsinki. Another vivid Vancouver memory for Morgan was a wild party given by French mathematician Adrien Douady, who was beloved for his unconventional 
joie de vivre
.

The Vancouver congress was held at the University of British Columbia, back in the days when it was still possible to hold an ICM on a university campus. Today the size and complexity of the ICM make a university venue impossible. As with the past several congresses, ICM2026 will be held in a dedicated conference site, the Pennsylvania Convention Center, which has plenty of space and good facilities for the myriad congress events.

Another important difference between ICMs of recent times and those of decades past can be seen in the role that the congress now plays as a forum for celebrating how mathematics connects to society, culture, and the arts. In this spirit an extensive array of activities is planned for the Philadelphia congress, many of them aimed at the general public.

In the middle weekend of the congress, a team from the National Museum of Mathematics in New York City will stage a public Math Festival in the exhibition hall of the convention center. The ICM2026 Organizing Committee has approved about twenty proposals for math-and-art exhibits, documentary screenings, hands-on activities, and the like; some of these will take place only during the Math Festival, while others will be available for the duration of the congress. One example: 3Blue1Brown creator Grant Sanderson will do live online presentations to accompany showings of his acclaimed math videos, which are both rigorous and beautiful. Also on hand will be the Mathemalchemy exhibition, a collaborative art installation that celebrates the creativity and beauty of mathematics.

Fifteen minutes by foot from the convention center is the American Philosophical Society (APS), whose archives include papers of some prominent American mathematicians. Mathematics historian Karen Parshall of the University of Virginia is working with the APS to create an exhibit that will draw on materials from the eighteenth through the twentieth centuries to provide glimpses into the history of mathematics in the United States. Because the space that the APS is able to offer is quite limited, the exhibit will also be available in online form.

Among other off-site activities will be a concert and presentation by organist Daniel Forger. Hopes are high that Philadelphia’s renowned Wanamaker organ, which was built in 1904 and is the world’s largest functioning pipe organ, will be available for the concert. Mathematically themed murals will be painted on walls near the convention center, a series of movies featuring mathematics will be screened, and there will be a session on mathematics and sports (including, the organizers hope, a trip to the local stadium for a game of the Philadelphia Phillies). An event to honor the memory of Emmy Noether will include a trip to her grave at Bryn Mawr College.

Of particular interest to many attendees will be a symposium honoring Jean-Pierre Serre. To celebrate his 100th year, the congress will host several lectures about the profound influence of this legendary mathematician.

This is the third in a series of articles about the upcoming ICM2026. Links to the first two are available here:

“Celebrating Mathematics: ICM2026 in Philadelphia,” 
Notices
, October 2025, 
https://www.ams.org/journals/notices/202509/rnoti-p1027.pdf

“An Inspirational Mix: ICM2026 in Philadelphia,” 
Notices
, March 2025, 
https://www.ams.org/journals/notices/202503/rnoti-p304.pdf

5
.

Looking Forward to a Great ICM

In July 2026, Philadelphia will be awash in events surrounding the 250th anniversary of the United States. The city has a special significance in the festivities, because it was the site of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence on July 4, 1776. With ICM2026 happening in the same month, congress organizers are working on ways to connect the ICM to the anniversary activities.

The timing is fortuitous. At the heart of the founding of the US are ideals including acceptance, tolerance, and openness. “We want to make the ICM as welcoming a space as possible, and there is a lot of good will in the American public,” said Bryant. “We are looking forward to a great ICM.”

A Lot of Gold is Coming to Philly

The Fields Medal is solid gold.

Four of the five honors that the International Mathematical Union confers at the ICM include a medal as part of the prize. The medals differ from one another not only in design but also in provenance. Three are solid gold: the Fields Medal, the Abacus Medal, and the medal given for the Gauss Prize; they are struck in Toronto, Finland, and Germany, respectively. The Chern Medal, which is struck in Houston, is made of a silver-gold alloy and plated in gold.

The IMU understandably keeps mum about how all that treasure makes its way to the site of an ICM. Because gold is considered to be a monetary instrument, whether or not one intends it as such, carrying these medals across borders is a delicate matter. An official permit for import and export can require a lot of red tape. Often an explanatory letter will satisfy customs officials.

For the 2018 ICM in Rio de Janeiro, Robert Bryant was tasked with presenting the Chern Medal—and also with transporting the medal itself to Brazil. It was shipped by courier from Houston to his home in North Carolina, together with the necessary papers. “It looked like it was gold,” Bryant said. At the security check before his flight to Rio, airport personnel inspected the medal but didn’t bother much with the papers. “Once I explained that it wasn’t solid gold, they seemed to lose interest,” said Bryant.

It was at the Rio congress that the Fields Medal of Caucher Birkar was stolen. The medal was never recovered, but the IMU was able to quickly, and somewhat mysteriously, arrange for a replacement. As current IMU president and chair of the 2026 Fields Medal selection committee, Hiraku Nakajima will present the Fields Medals at ICM2026 in Philadelphia. At some point before the awards ceremony, he will have to take custody of the medals. Exactly how the handoff will happen “is secret,” he said, adding with a laugh: “I must be really careful!”

Allyn Jackson is a freelance writer specializing in mathematics and theoretical computer science. She is currently visiting the School of Mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. She may be reached at 
https://www.allynjackson.com/
. The writing of this article was supported by the Simons Foundation.
Article DOI: 
10.1090/noti3318
Credits

Photo of Irene Fonseca is courtesy of Carnegie Mellon University.

Photo of Robert L. Bryant is courtesy of Duke Photography, Les Todd, photographer.

Photo of Jalal Shatah is courtesy of New York University.

Photo of Wilfrid Gangbo is courtesy of Wilfrid Gangbo.

Photo of John W. Morgan is courtesy of Michael N. Meyer/Picture More Business.