     The AMS is deeply grateful for the support of the Bose, Datta, Mukhopadhyay
  and Sarkar Fund, which sponsors one lecture at the Current Events Bulletin annually.

The Fund’s purpose is to bring appreciation for mathematics to a broader audience. It was
 established in 2021 and made possible by the generosity of Dr. Salilesh Mukhopadhyay.
WHAT IS THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE
                    ABOUT?

           DAVID BEN-ZVI, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ELLIOT KIENZLE

        Abstract. The recent proof of the unramiﬁed Geometric Langlands Conjec-
        ture has attracted a lot of publicity, so this seems like a good time to address
        the title question. In one line, the Geometric Langlands correspondence is an
        algebraic spectral theorem for a certain class of diﬀerential equations called
        automorphic sheaves: it asserts they can be decomposed into monochromatic
        objects, which diagonalize the action of natural symmetries (Hecke operators),
        and it describes the corresponding colors or frequencies (Langlands parame-
        ters).
            The statement is very technical and esoteric sounding, the proof takes thou-
        sands of pages, and there are relatively few easily stated immediate conse-
        quences. So what’s the deal? In this brief survey I will present the subject
        informally as a blueprint for a master plan for the study of nonabelian sym-
        metry, touching on some of the main motivations, connections and structures
        that have emerged.



   The spectral theorem and the Fourier transform are ubiquitous in mathematics
and physics. Fundamentally they have to do with the diagonalization – or spectral
decomposition – of abelian symmetries. One can imagine that a counterpart for
nonabelian symmetry would be even more powerful and important. However, our
current understanding of nonabelian duality is reminiscent of the parable of the
blind men and the elephant. Number theorists have discovered a grand vision for
nonabelian duality, the Langlands program, with echoes throughout representation
theory and numerous applications (the most famous is the proof of Fermat’s Last
Theorem). Independently physicists have produced another grand vision, a non-
abelian form of the electric-magnetic duality of Maxwell theory known as Montonen-
Olive S-duality, with its own echoes throughout mathematical physics. Thanks to
research into the geometric Langlands program, we now understand that these two
communities are in fact exploring the same giant pachyderm, and they are now able
to share observations and coordinate their explorations. In fact we may now have
identiﬁed the animal’s beating heart – the circle of ideas surrounding the geometric
Satake correspondence, factorization and the spectral action.
   This exploration has reached a major benchmark with the recent proof of the
unramiﬁed geometric Langlands conjecture by Gaitsgory and Raskin with Arinkin,
Beraldo, Campbell, Chen, Faergeman, Lin and Rozenbylum. This proof is laid
out in what amounts to three papers [GR24a, ABC` 24a, GR24b] and a two-volume
book [ABC` 24b, CCF` 24], all building on a vast body of prior technical work,
including Lurie’s foundations of higher algebra [Lur09,Lur] and much of Gaitsgory’s
work over the past twenty years. We will take this occasion to survey what kind of
statement the Geometric Langlands Correspondence — GLC, from now on — is,
why we might care, why it is true and what might be next. My emphasis is on the
parts that make the subject most appealing to me – its multitude of connections
and perspectives, and the deep underlying structures it has helped uncover.
                                               1
2                                  DAVID BEN-ZVI


   Caveat emptor: I consistently err on the side of intuition over precision, and
in references to survey articles over original sources. I have not come close to being
comprehensive, or even adequate, in referencing relevant papers and important
developments. I also do not discuss Phase I of the GLC Universe, from the origin
of the problem in [Dri83, Lau87] to the construction of Hecke eigensheaves for GLn
in [FGV01, Gai04] – see [Fre04, Gai17a] for earlier surveys of the area – but focus
on the greatest hits of Phase II, the categorical GLC, from [BD] to its recent proof.

          1. What kind of statement is geometric Langlands?
   I will describe the geometric Langlands correspondence as a kind of nonabelian
counterpart to the Spectral Theorem. To set this up, let’s ﬁrst step back and revisit
the Spectral Theorem. The reader impatient to get to geometric Langlands can skip
straight to § 1.4.

1.1. The Spectral Theorem. The spectral theorem provides a general theory of
diagonalization or spectral decomposition for self-adjoint operators H on Hilbert
spaces H. In ﬁnite dimensions, it says that H decomposes as a direct sum of
eigenspaces
                                  H»        Hλ
                                        à
                                         λPRt

so that the action of H is given by multiplication by the coordinate function t.
(Here we’ll denote by Rt a copy of R with coordinate t, our notation for the domain
of eigenvalues and spectral measures, i.e., momentum space.) In the general case of
a self-adjoint operator, while H might not have any actual eigenvectors in H, the
spectral theorem applies measure theory to provide a sense in which we can write all
vectors in H as continuous linear combinations – integrals over Rt – of eigenvectors
with eigenvalue λ P Rt . This can be formulated in the language of projection-valued
measures on H, or more abstractly using measurable ﬁelds Hptqdμptq of Hilbert
spaces over Rt . We recover the Hilbert space H with the operator H as the direct
integral (or “global sections”) of the Hilbert-space valued measure
                                       ż‘
(1.1)                             H“      Hptqdμptq
                                       Rt

equipped with the action of the coordinate function t. In other words, we build H as
an integral of eigenspaces Hptq against a spectral measure dμptq, and the operator
H is given by the action of the coordinate t.
   Another point of view on the spectral theorem is that it extends the action of
the coordinate t on H (acting as the operator H) to a functional calculus on H, an
action of all bounded measurable functions of t. This is formally expressed in the
structure of a module (in fact a W ˚-module) for the commutative (von Neumann)
algebra L8 pRt q. In this language, the projection from H to its integral over an
interval I is given by the action of the indicator function of I.
   We can also view the pair (H, H) as describing a unitary representation x ÞÑ eixH
of the group Rx (a dual copy of R with coordinate x – the position space), and the
spectral theorem describes the decomposition of unitary representations into irre-
ducible representations, the eigenspaces Cλ . In this way the spectral theorem gives
a detailed description of the unitary representation theory of Rx , and it provides
the blueprint for describing the representation theory of other groups.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                              3


   While not usually phrased this way, the spectral theorem in fact deﬁnes an
equivalence of categories


                    tHilbert spaces with a self-adjoint operatoru
                                         Ù
                   tmeasurable ﬁelds of Hilbert spaces H
                                                       p on Rt u


   – i.e., we can spectrally decompose not just the objects, unitary representations of
R (or pairs pH, Hq), into multiplicity spaces (eigenspaces), but also the morphisms,
unitary maps of representations (or operators commuting with H), as maps between
their multiplicity spaces. Again this is a model for how we might seek to describe
other representation theories.
   Algebra has its own form of spectral decomposition, in which we drop unitarity.
It takes the form of an equivalence


                      tvector spaces with an endomorphismu
                                         Ù
                    talgebraic families of vector spaces over A1t u


   where we extend a single endomorphism H of a complex vector space V to an
action on V of the polynomial ring Crts of algebraic functions on the aﬃne line (the
“functional calculus”). We then use localization to “spread V out” over the t-line
– to any open subset U Ă A1t deﬁned by the nonvanishing of some polynomial p we
attach a module VU over functions on U by inverting p – the algebraist’s counterpart
to acting by indicator functions of intervals. These modules form a sheaf – we can
recover V and its endomorphism from the modules VUi for an open cover of the line.
We will encounter such algebraic families repeatedly - they make sense over any
algebraically deﬁned space X, they have the oﬃcial name quasicoherent sheaves,
and they form a category we denote QCohpXq.

1.2. The spectral theorem vs. the Fourier transform. The spectral theorem
has a symbiotic relation with the Fourier transform. On the one hand, arguably
the fundamental feature of the Fourier transform
                                                ż
                   2     „    2
                 L pRx q Ý
                         Ñ L pRt q,      f ptq “ f pxqe´2πixt dx
                                         p
                                                       R
is that it takes translation, diﬀerentiation and convolution operators in x into multi-
plication operators in t – i.e., it simultaneously diagonalizes the action of the group
R, its Lie algebra and its group algebra. In the language of the spectral theorem,
the Fourier transform says that the spectral  ş‘decomposition of the regular represen-
tation Rx œ L2 pRx q is given by L2 pRt q “ Rt Ct dt, the “constant rank one” family
of Hilbert spaces on Rt , with multiplicity one for every frequency. Said another
way, Fourier inversion                    ż
                               f pxq “       fpptqe2πixt dt
                                         R
4                                   DAVID BEN-ZVI


lets us build functions as superpositions of exponentials, the eigenfunctions for
translation, which are the pure frequency (monochromatic) waves parametrized by
frequencies (colors) t.
   On the other hand, the spectral theorem can itself be seen as a kind of “cate-
goriﬁed” Fourier transform, taking unitary representations of Rx to Hilbert-space
valued measures on Rt . This is not (just) a fanciful game – it’s already evident
in von Neumann’s direct integral notation, equation (1.1) where we integrate not
scalar- but vector-space-valued functions against a measur. The monochromatic
waves are now the irreducible (i.e., one-dimensional) representations of Rx , which
are taken by the spectral theorem to skyscrapers (vector-space valued δ-functions)
Cλ at λ P Rt . The spectral theorem then lets us write any unitary representation
as a direct integral (superposition) of the vector space valued function given by its
eigenspaces. The regular representation L2 pRx q plays the role of white light, a su-
perposition of all possible frequencies, and indeed its transform L2 pRt q is supported
everywhere on the t-line.

1.3. Great, but where is Geometric Langlands? Let’s consider the spectral
theorem for vector spaces with an invertible operator – in other words, representa-
tions of the group Z, ReppZq. The algebraic spectral theorem identiﬁes these with
modules for the ring Crt, t´1 s of Laurent polynomials in one variable, i.e., quasico-
herent sheaves on the punctured complex line A1t zt0u “ Cˆ    t – we have just excluded
0 from the spectrum. (If we throw in unitarity we get instead families of Hilbert
spaces over U p1q Ă Cˆ t .)
    This result has a useful geometric interpretation, illustrated in Figure 1. Let’s
identify Z with the fundamental group π1 pCˆ     z q of the punctured z-line. Then a
representation of Z can be described as describing the twisting or monodromy of
a local system of vector spaces on Cˆ z , a family of vector spaces that are all iden-
tiﬁed locally but may undergo a twist as we go around a loop. Local systems can
be understood as capturing the multivaluedness of solutions of algebraic systems
                            d
of diﬀerential equations z dz ´ Apzq on Cˆ  z . The eigenspaces (or irreducible repre-
sentations) Cμ for Z, parametrized by points μ P Cˆ      t . They label the diﬀerential
equations Lμ “ tz dz d
                       ´ λu for μ “ exppλq, with solution the multivalued function
z λ which gets multiplied by a factor μ as we go around the puncture. (These func-
tions are illustrated as branched covers of Cˆ in the ﬁgure.) The spectral theorem
then gets reinterpreted as the statement that any algebraic system of diﬀerential
equations on Cˆ – or, by passing to monodromies, any local system L P LocpCˆ q
– is realized as a superposition (direct integral) of the Lμ . In other words, any L
is encoded by the algebraic family μ ÞÑ Lpμq
                                          p     of multiplicity spaces for μ P Cˆt , and
we have an equivalence


                             z q “ tLocal systems L on Cz u
                        LocpCˆ                          ˆ

                                         Ù

                        t q “ tquasicoherent sheaves L on Ct u
                  QCohpCˆ                            p     ˆ




   And there we have it: this equivalence (known as the Mellin transform for
sheaves) is itself a case of the geometric Langlands correspondence. In the GLC,
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                              5




        Figure 1. The Mellin transform for sheaves: Spectres guide
        monochromatic local systems on Cˆ   z to their colors in Ct . A
                                                                  ˆ

        skyscraper corresponds to the “color” white.



we get to ﬁx a group — here the group is GL1 – and a Riemann surface – here Cˆ       z
(or more oﬃcially, the Riemann sphere P1 with tame ramiﬁcation at 0, 8).
   What’s special about these monochromatic objects Lμ , the building blocks? Cˆ     z
is a group, and the Lμ are known as character sheaves since they behave like
characters of this group – e.g., their solutions z λ are characters. We can express
this idea as follows: using the group structure we can translate local systems around
under rotation by w P Cˆ . The Lμ “ tz λ u are the eigensystems, the systems
consistently isomorphic to their rotation by every w P Cˆ thanks to pwzqλ “ wλ z λ .
An elaboration of this statement is that the Mellin transform identiﬁes the structure
of convolution on LocpCˆ  z q, expressing the group structure of C , with the structure
                                                                  ˆ
                                                              ˆ
of multiplication, or pointwise tensor product, on QCohpCt q. In this way it is both
a form of the spectral theorem and a categoriﬁed Fourier transform.
   To get more into the spirit, the same basic idea works for any compact Riemann
surface C of genus g and gives the Betti geometric Langlands correspondence for
GL1 on C. Instead of the spectral theorem for invertible operators, i.e., representa-
tions of Z, we consider 2g commuting invertible operators. We can reinterpret these
operators as the monodromies of a local system (or multivaluedness associated to a
system of diﬀerential equations) on the Jacobian torus JacpCq „ pS 1 q2g of C. The
spectral theorem lets us think of these operators as describing a module for the
ring of Laurent polynomials in 2g variables - or more suggestively, a quasicoherent
sheaf on the space LocGL1 pCq „ pCˆ q2g of rank one local systems on C (the data
of a single scalar twisting for every loop). The result is an equivalence
6                                     DAVID BEN-ZVI




            LocpJacpCqq “ ReppZ2g q ÐÑ QCohppCˆ q2g “ LocGL1 pCqq.

   This equivalence has the property that translation using the group structure
on the Jacobian is taken to multiplication (tensor product of modules), and that
“monochromatic objects” – given by a single 2g-tuple pμ1 , . . . , μ2g q of multivalued-
ness along the 2g circles – are taken to skyscrapers at points of LocCˆ pCq with
coordinates given by the μi .
   This ﬁts in a general theme of categorical Fourier transforms – these are equiva-
lences of (derived) categories of sheaves of various ﬂavors between an abelian group
and a dual, exchanging convolution and tensor product operations [Lau96]. Exam-
ples include the Fourier-Malgrange, Fourier-Sato and Fourier-Deligne transforms
identifying D-modules, constructible sheaves and -adic sheaves (respectively) on
dual vector spaces over C, R and Fq , and the Fourier-Mukai transform identifying
coherent sheaves on dual abelian varieties [Muk81]. The challenge of geometric
Langlands is to develop a nonabelian counterpart to this rich theory.

1.4. The landscape of nonabelian duality. Let’s brieﬂy sketch the landscape
of nonabelian duality, in both its number theoretic and physical formulations. In
each, we really have not one conjectural duality statement but an interconnected
family of conjectures, indexed by the choices of a group and a setting (ﬁeld or
manifold).

1.4.1. The group. We ﬁrst ﬁx
   ‚ G a reductive algebraic group - for example GLn , SLn , SO2n , SO2n`1 , . . . ,
E8 . Over C, where we’ll mostly stay, these are precisely the complexiﬁcations of
compact Lie groups. (We will only consider connected groups.)
   Each such G comes together with a “dual” complex1 reductive group, the Lang-
lands dual group Ǧ. The general idea behind Ǧ is that representations of G of any
ﬂavor (i.e., maps out of G) should correspond to conjugacy classes in – or more
generally, homomorphisms into – its dual. It can be deﬁned concretely via the
combinatorial theory of Lie groups (roots, Dynkin diagrams and so on), by keeping
the Weyl group of G but dualizing all of the torus and root space combinatorics.
The groups GLn and SO2n are self-dual, simply connected groups like SLn are
exchanged with adjoint groups like P GLn , but the odd orthogonal groups SO2n`1
are exchanged with the symplectic groups Sp2n . As we will see, the geometric
Langlands correspondence provides a fundamental description of where the dual
group comes from, see § 4.3.

1.4.2. The setting. Next we need to choose a setting.
      ‚ For Langlands we get to choose a ﬁeld F – this can be a global ﬁeld like a
        number ﬁeld, a local ﬁeld like the reals or p-adics, or the ﬁeld of rational
        functions on an algebraic curve (over a ﬁnite ﬁeld, its algebraic closure, or
        the complex numbers).
      ‚ For S-duality we get to choose a manifold M of dimension at most 4.

   1 More generally we get a group over the ﬁeld of deﬁnition k of the representations of G we

wish to study – which we’ll assume (or pretend to assume) is C.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                            7


   The parallel between these two worlds is given by the dictionary of arithmetic
topology, or “knots and primes” analogy [Mor12], in which both number ﬁelds and
curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds are thought of as a 3-manifolds, while local ﬁeld and curves
over algebraically closed ﬁelds are thought of as 2-manifolds.

1.4.3. The duality. In each such setting we have a duality identifying two sides:
   ‚ Automorphic / A-side: this side concerns a version of the representation theory
of G associated to M or F . This comes in the form of harmonic analysis on a moduli
space BunG pM q of G-bundles or gauge ﬁelds on M , or on a locally symmetric
space rGsF associated to G and F . These might sound quite diﬀerent, but have an
identical nuts and bolts (adèlic) description, going back to A. Weil – morally rGsF
is a version of “BunG pSpecpOF qq”, the moduli of bundles over the spectrum of the
ring of integers of F .
   ‚ Spectral / B-side: involves algebraic geometry of spaces of local systems (or
Langlands parameters) LocǦ , which are character varieties (spaces of representa-
tions) of the Galois group of F – or the fundamental group of M – into the dual
group Ǧ.
   The settings are all tightly linked, making the situation very constrained.
   Geometric Langlands is a common special case of both stories – it’s the case of S-
duality when M “ C is a compact Riemann surface (or smooth complex projective
algebraic curve), and of the Langlands correspondence over F the ﬁeld of rational
functions on C. To give a sneak preview of § 3, the GLC asserts that – on the level
of sheaf theory –
          the moduli space of bundles BunG pCq behaves like an
           abelian group, with characters given by the Ǧ-local
                         systems LocǦ pCq on C.
   Namely, we study the spectral theory of algebraic system of diﬀerential equations
on BunG pCq, or equivalently their topological monodromy data, as we did for the
Jacobian torus parametrizing line bundles (G “ GL1 ). Geometric Langlands spec-
trally decomposes these data as quasicoherent sheaves over the space LocǦ pCq of
Ǧ-valued local systems on C. It has the features of a categoriﬁed Fourier transform,
exchanging convolution and multiplication operators, and thereby writing vector-
valued functions on BunG pCq as direct integrals of special “monochromatic” ones,
the eigensheaves, labeled by points of LocǦ pCq.


                              2. Why do we care?
   The Geometric Langlands correspondence has inﬂuenced a broad swath of math-
ematics. Some of this inﬂuence comes from direct implications. Much more sig-
niﬁcantly, the geometric Langlands program straddles representation theory, arith-
metic and quantum ﬁeld theory and serves as a prototype for the general dream of
nonabelian duality, where most of the key subtleties and roadblocks are apparent
but one has access to a dizzying array of tools from geometry to overcome them.
We will also encounter along the way several fundamental ideas and constructions
that were ﬁrst developed in the study of geometric Langlands, of which arguably
the most signiﬁcant is the theory of factorization and factorization homology, see
Section 4.2. Here I give an extremely brief account of some of these motivations.
8                                   DAVID BEN-ZVI


2.1. GLC in low genus. When we restrict to curves of genus zero and one, both
sides of the correspondence become very explicit and classical objects, for which
the Langlands dual description provided by geometric Langlands provides deep in-
sights. For example, in genus one the Langlands parameters are commuting pairs of
matrices, whose algebraic geometry has long been elusive [LNY24]. On marked or
punctured curves of genus zero Langlands parameters become meromorphic ODE
or, in the étale setting, Galois representations of the ﬁeld of rational functions in
one variable. In this (ramiﬁed) setting, the GLC has been particularly important in
the study of the special class of rigid local systems [Yun17], including the arithmetic
of Kloosterman’s exponential sums and Bessel equations [FG09, HNY13, XZ22] and
combinatorics of Schubert calculus [LT24]. A striking application is Yun’s solution
of the inverse Galois problem for some ﬁnite reductive groups [Yun14]. In the other
direction, the automorphic spectral problems studied by the GLC are identiﬁed in
low genus with the solution of famous quantum integrable systems, such as the
Gaudin spin chain and the Calogero-Moser particle systems. The GLC then pro-
vides a general paradigm for solving quantum integrable systems in which the joint
spectrum of commuting Hamiltonians is given by Langlands parameters [Fre05].

2.2. Representation Theory of Reductive Groups. The most direct points
of contact of GLC are in representation theory, where it serves as a prototype for
a spectral theory for representations associated to a reductive group G. What
makes this ﬁeld remarkable is that the same G has many distinct avatars, which
nonetheless share the same structural features. At the core of the subject since
the 1990s is a fundamental triangle of representation theories, linked by a web of
conjectures of Lusztig [Car06]:
    (1) quantum groups Uq g
    (2) loop groups LG and aﬃne Kac-Moody algebras p      g
    (3) reductive groups and Lie algebras in positive characteristic G, g{Fq
Ideas from the GLC — speciﬁcally the geometric Satake correspondence [MV07]
and its “tamely ramiﬁed” reﬁnement [Bez06, Bez16] — have radically transformed
this area, resulting in some of the greatest advances in 21st century representation
theory in the works of Bezrukavnikov, Williamson and their collaborators.

2.3. Local Langlands. The local Langlands correspondence provides a conjec-
tural spectral theory for (complex or -adic) representations of reductive groups
over local ﬁelds F , like Qp , R and Fq pptqq. In other words it proposes an iden-
tiﬁcation of representations with families of vector spaces (sheaves of multiplicity
spaces) over a “spectrum”. Moreover it identiﬁes the parameter space or spectrum
as a space of Langlands parameters – collections of conjugacy classes in ǦpCq,
organized as representations of a form of the Galois group of F into ǦpCq.
   It’s a crucial partner to the global Langlands program, much as the spectral
theorem is to the Fourier transform: global Langlands concerns the spectral de-
composition of the particular representation L2 prGsF q of the GpFv q (for v a place
of a global ﬁeld F ) associated to G and F (for instance, L2 pSL2 pZqzSL2 pRqq).
   From this perspective we see a close parallel between geometric and local Lang-
lands, and indeed local Langlands has recently been transformed under the inﬂuence
of the GLC into a categorical statement. One hint to why comes from the arith-
metic topology analogy between number ﬁelds and 3-manifolds: here global ﬁelds
like Q behave like 3-manifolds and local ﬁelds like Qp behave like surfaces forming
                    THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                                      9


their boundary. This leads one to suspect the Langlands program over a local ﬁeld
– much more than over a global ﬁeld – should share structural features with the
Langlands program over a Riemann surface, i.e. GLC.
   This parallel has become much more direct in the seminal works of Fargues-
Scholze [FS21] in the p-adic case and Scholze [Sch] in the real case. In these works
the local Langlands correspondence is literally realized as a case of the (unramiﬁed)
geometric Langlands correspondence, but in a much more exotic setting than curves
over a ﬁeld – the Fargues-Fontaine curve and twistor P1 , respectively. Many of the
ideas developed in the GLC – most notably factorization and the spectral action
– have already played a crucial role here, notably in establishing the automorphic-
to-Galois direction of local Langlands [FS21]. This provides a direct path for the
ideas and techniques of the GLC to impact number theory. This is an extremely
active area, with new frontiers including an emerging geometric formulation of the
Langlands correspondence for p-adic analytic representations of p-adic groups.
   We refer the reader to the excellent overview [Zhu23] for some highlights of the
steady stream of recent applications of GLC to a wide range of problems in both
the local and global arithmetic Langlands program.
2.4. Langlands for Function Fields. A very diﬀerent (and much older) relation
between geometric and classical Langlands comes from the close analogy (Weil’s
Rosetta Stone) between number ﬁelds and function ﬁelds of curves over a ﬁnite ﬁeld
Fq , and between Riemann surfaces and curves over its algebraic closure2 Fq . In this
analogy vector spaces of automorphic forms arise as decategoriﬁcations of categories
of automorphic sheaves, via the mechanism of traces of Frobenius (Grothendieck’s
function-sheaf correspondence). This mechanism is a direct extension of the link
provided by the Weil conjectures between point counts for varieties over ﬁnite ﬁelds
with cohomology over their algebraic closure. Under this mechanism, the spectral
decomposition of automorphic forms (the classical Langlands correspondence) is a
shadow of the categorical decomposition of automorphic sheaves (geometric Lang-
lands).
    The original dream behind developing the GLC is that one might translate one’s
way back across Weil’s Rosetta Stone, carrying along insights as we pass from Rie-
mann surfaces to curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds and maybe eventually to number ﬁelds. In-
deed the development of the GLC has largely taken place in parallel over C and over
Fq . In this way geometric Langlands ideas were crucial to advances such as Ngô’s
proof of the Fundamental Lemma [Nad12, Hal12], one of the major breakthroughs
in the arithmetic Langlands program; V. Laﬀorgue’s work establishing one direc-
tion of the Langlands correspondence for function ﬁelds [Car, Str17]; the proof by
Gaitsgory-Lurie of Weil’s Tamagawa number conjecture for function ﬁelds [GL19],
and the proof by Gaitsgory of de Jong’s conjecture [Gai07] on monodromy over
ﬁnite ﬁelds.
    The landmark work [AGK` 20] developed a formulation – the étale or restricted
form – of the (unramiﬁed) GLC for curves C over Fq . Crucially, this formulation
actually implies, after taking traces of Frobenius, a signiﬁcantly strengthened form
of the unramiﬁed Langlands conjecture for function ﬁelds. Now that unramiﬁed
GLC in characteristic zero is understood, the pendulum has swung back. Very
recently [GR25] a large part of the positive characteristic version has been proved.
   2 From the arithmetic topology perspective, this corresponds to thinking of a 2-manifold as the

ﬁber of a ﬁbered 3-manifold.
10                                    DAVID BEN-ZVI


The ICM addresses [Gai25] and [Ras] outline visions for understanding the fully
ramiﬁed Langlands correspondence over function ﬁelds and for proving some of
the most important open problems in the theory of automorphic forms in positive
characteristic, the Ramanujan and Arthur conjectures.


2.5. Relations to physics. A lot of what gives the GLC its appeal and power is
its close ties to questions in physics, which we will only hint at here.
   Kapustin and Witten [KW07] (see also [Fre10, BZN18]) explained how the GLC
naturally arises as an aspect of Montonen-Olive S-duality – a conjectural nonabelian
extension of the electric-magnetic symmetry of Maxwell theory.
   S-duality is a non-perturbative equivalence between two four-dimensional quan-
tum ﬁeld theories, the maximally supersymmetric (N “ 4) extensions of Yang-Mills
theory for two Langlands dual Lie groups. To get to geometric Langlands, we throw
away more and more information from this incredibly rich statement. First we pass
to a twist of the theory, meaning that we throw away all of the metric dependence
of the theory (e.g., dynamics) by passing to cohomology of a suitable diﬀerential.
We then simplify further by only considering the theory on 4-manifolds of the form
C ˆ Σ for a ﬁxed Riemann3 surface C. In other words, we extract from the original
4d gauge theory an assignment from Riemann surfaces to 2d topological quantum
ﬁeld theories. Finally, we follow the example of homological mirror symmetry and
focus, for each such 2d TQFT, only on its category of boundary conditions. Thus
we end up with an assignment from Riemann surfaces to categories (a categorical
analog of the extremely rich and well-studied notion of 2d conformal ﬁeld theory).
   Kapustin and Witten discovered that this subsequent simpliﬁcation applied to
the physical S-duality conjecture produces exactly the kinds of categories appear-
ing in the geometric Langlands correspondence. Their work, and two decades of
subsequent work, shows that as we pay attention to more and more of the forgotten
structure from physics we can see all of the key features of the geometric Langlands
program emerge as well as remarkable new features.
   First, the physics derivation from 4d gauge theory (and even further, from 6d
QFT) provides a uniﬁed framework with which to understand numerous connec-
tions (many of which predate [KW07]) with 2d conformal ﬁeld theory, classical
and quantum integrable systems, mirror symmetry, gauge-theoretic invariants in
topology and the Seiberg-Witten geometry of supersymmetric gauge theory.
   Second, we ﬁnd that geometric Langlands is just (part of) the 2d part of a
statement about 4d theories, so extends (conjecturally) to statements involving
manifolds of every dimension up to four (including with boundaries, corners and
defects) which are very tightly controlled by the algebraic structure of TQFT.
   Third, physics demonstrates the full symmetry between the two sides of the
correspondence – after all, we start with the same 4d QFT applied to two Langlands
dual groups, a symmetry that’s broken by choices made in the process but can be
restored by varying those choices, but can then be use to inform our understanding
of both sides.



   3 Diﬀerent aspects of the construction depend either on a complex structure on C or just on

the underlying 2-manifold.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                           11


                              3. What does it say?
   We now take a closer look at the actual statement of the geometric Langlands
correspondence.

3.1. The language: categories and derived categories. We argued that the
spectral theorem is concerned with a category, namely unitary representations of
R - we have not only a collection of objects, but they also talk to each other.
Indeed the basic objects of study in representation theory are categories, arising
as representations of groups or algebras, and the goal is to describe them in a
meaningful way, just as spectral theory builds vector spaces with an endomorphism
out of eigenspaces.
   On the other hand, the analogy between the spectral theorem and the Fourier
transform suggests we think of categories as analogues of Hilbert spaces. Indeed
objects in a category have an “inner product”, their Hom space. Of course it takes a
lot more than a set with an inner product to make a Hilbert space – we have addition
and scalar multiplication, topology and completeness. Likewise we don’t just want
a category but one that has operations like direct sum and a notion of completeness.
In this analogy homological algebra takes the place of linear algebra over a ﬁeld k:
the well behaved class of categories in which we can perform basic operations are
what we will refer to as derived categories (the technical names involve words like
triangulated dg categories or k-linear stable 8-categories). These basic examples
are built by starting with abelian categories of modules for k-algebras and then
“completing for operations of homological algebra”. Homotopical algebra then
provides counterparts to many basic constructions in functional analysis.
   Classical harmonic analysis describes the decomposition of vector spaces of func-
tions under the action of symmetries. In recent decades, a rich categorical harmonic
analysis has emerged (motivated by a variety of problems in algebraic and analytic
geometry, homotopy theory, mathematical physics and representation theory) in
which vector spaces of functions are replaced by derived categories of sheaves (i.e.,
diﬀerent kinds of vector-space-valued functions). As we mentioned, the direct in-
tegral formulation of the classical spectral theorem is already an example of this
fanciful-sounding notion. The growing zoo of diﬀerent sheaf theories (also known as
six-functor formalisms) provides a counterpart to the menagerie of diﬀerent function
spaces.
   Let’s summarize this basic dictionary:

                vector spaces                          categories
                Hilbert spaces                 derived categories
                (Unitary) operators              (exact) functors
                Functions                                 sheaves
                Integral            pushforward / direct integral
                multiplication                    tensor product
                Function spaces     derived categories of sheaves

3.2. The setting: moduli of bundles. We ﬁx a compact Riemann surface
(smooth complex algebraic curve) C, and a complex reductive group G (which
the reader is welcomed, without much loss, to take to be the group GLn C of invert-
ible matrices). We will focus on the unramiﬁed GLC – meaning we don’t puncture
12                                  DAVID BEN-ZVI


C or decorate with extra data at points of C. This is the base case, and also the
one that’s been proved, though most of the general ideas have ramiﬁed versions.
   The main object of study is BunG pCq, the moduli space of G-bundles on C
(denoted BunG when C is implied). This is the object of algebraic geometry which
parametrizes principal G-bundles on C (i.e., rank n vector bundles for G “ GLn ).
This means it’s deﬁned by prescribing not just its points but all maps into it —
to give a map from a variety S to BunG pCq is the same as giving a G-bundle on
S ˆ C. In other words, it’s an algebraic geometer’s version of a classifying space in
topology – speciﬁcally, it is the space of algebraic maps from C to the classifying
space for G.
   Technically, BunG is not a variety but a stack – a hybrid of classical varieties and
classifying spaces, which poetically means a variety where the points carry groups
of automorphisms. It is crucial for GLC to consider BunG with all its warts, rather
than replacing it by the more concrete and classical projective variety parametrizing
semistable G-bundles constructed by geometric invariant theory: ﬁrst, we’re doing
representation theory, so discarding internal groups of symmetries is counter to the
entire spirit of the subject; second, the variety of semistable bundles itself can be
singular (unlike BunG ) and, more crucially, has less symmetry: it is not preserved
by Hecke correspondences, which are the most essential feature of the Langlands
program.

3.2.1. What does BunG look like? A vision of the moduli space BunG is presented
in Figure 2. For G “ GL1 , we are parametrizing line bundles, and BunG is the
Picard group of the Riemann surface — the Jacobian torus of C, times Z for degree
(and every line bundle carries the multiplicative group as its automorphisms).
   And that’s the crucial thing: BunGL1 is an abelian group under tensor product
of line bundles, or at a more granular level, under addition of divisors.
   For G “ GLn , BunG is the much studied moduli space of rank n vector bundles,
except we work with bundles as given to us and don’t throw away “unstable” bun-
dles with lots of automorphisms. Unfortunately, there’s no natural multiplication
on the collection of rank n bundles, let alone for other G, so BunG is not a group.
   For G semisimple (e.g., SLn ), ﬁxing a point x P C, BunG can be written like
a locally symmetric space ΓzH “ ΓzSL2 R{SOp2q in analogy with modular curves,
namely
                           BunG pCq “ GpCzxqzLG{LG` .
Here LG “ M appDˆ , Gq is the loop group of maps from a punctured disc, LG` “
M appD, Gq is the subgroup of maps that extend to the disc. The space Gr “
LG{LG` is the aﬃne Grassmannian, a counterpart of the familiar Grassmannians
in the inﬁnite-dimensional context of loop groups, and we ﬁnd BunG as its quotient
by the group of maps into G from the punctured curve.
   For any group BunG (like the modular curves) has an “adèlic” description famil-
iar [only] to number theorists as a double coset space BunG“GpF qzGpAC q{GpOAC q,
treating all points democratically (here F is the ﬁeld of rational functions on C).
This looks unwieldy but gives more insight into the symmetries of BunG . It is the
nonabelian version of the description of P icpCq as the group of divisors modulo
principal divisors – those coming from functions, GL1 pF q.
   The stack BunG is smooth but not quasicompact (open covers need not have ﬁ-
nite subcovers). This is in close parallel to the noncompactness of modular curves:
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                            13




        Figure 2. The moduli of bundles and its cusps, with strata of
        increasing codimension.

we have a “compact core”, the semistable part Bunss  G that’s close to being a projec-
tive variety, and inﬁnite “throats” (or cusps) with strata of more and more unstable
bundles (as seen in the ﬁgure). These throats however have a nice inductive struc-
ture that contrasts with the irreducible nature of the core: the “least compact”
(or radial ) part ﬁbers over the space BunT of bundles for the maximal torus of G,
which is a product of Picard groups. In general there are similar throats associated
with bundles for other Levi subgroups (block diagonal matrices in the case of GLn ).
3.3. Sheaf theory. As in any harmonic analysis problem we will study BunG pCq
by linearizing it – in this case, through categories of sheaves. And we will need to
pick precisely what kind of “function space” we study.
   A sheaf on BunG pCq can be thought of as a C-analog of a representation of G
– indeed sheaves on BunG pptq, which is a single point with G-symmetry, are just
representations of G.
   So what is the kind of representation theory we will consider, the automorphic
sheaves? As we encountered already for the Mellin transform (Section 1.3), there
are three main ﬂavors:
      ‚ de Rham (Lie algebra) version: We consider sheaves whose sections on
        any open are a module over the Lie algebra of vector ﬁelds - so these are
        sheaves with a notion of diﬀerentiation. Equivalently these are modules
        for the associative algebra of algebraic diﬀerential operators, i.e., linear
        systems of PDEs with algebraic coeﬃcients, or D-modules, DmodpBunG q.
        Like distributions, these equations have “wave front sets” or characteristic
        directions that are microlocal in nature: they deﬁne subsets of the phase
        space T ˚ BunG .
      ‚ Betti (group) version: here we study instead constructible sheaves, vector
        spaces with notion of parallel transport along paths. The most basic ex-
        amples are local systems, representations of π1 , which come from solving
        the parallel transport problem for ﬂat connections (i.e. describing mon-
        odromy). But (unlike in our study of the Mellin transform) we also need
14                                     DAVID BEN-ZVI


      to allow more singular objects where we only require parallel transport to
      be invertible in “most” directions. This comes from solving PDEs with
      characteristic directions that obstruct local solvability. The precise choice
      of which singularities to allow (the “global nilpotent cone”) is guided by
      lessons in representation theory going back to Harish-Chandra’s work on
      distributional characters for Lie groups. The resulting category is denoted
      ShvN pBunG q. This deﬁnition has a variant using étale topology that makes
      sense even in positive characteristic (for curves over ﬁnite ﬁelds).
    ‚ étale (restricted variation) version: this is an intermediate “common core”
      of the de Rham and Betti categories introduced in [AGK` 20]. It is gener-
      ated by (equivalently) D-modules or constructible sheaves with nilpotent
      singular support – in fact it is designed so as to be built discretely rather
      than continuously out of monochromatic objects. The two key advantages
      of the étale version are that it forms a conduit between the Betti and de
      Rham categories, and that it (unlike the other versions) makes sense in the
      setting of curves over any ﬁeld, in particular in positive characteristic.
  To avoid cumbersome notation we will refer to all three categories as simply
ShvpBunG q, except when we need to be more explicit about context.
3.4. The spectral side. On the other side of the GLC are the spaces of Langlands
parameters or Ǧ-local systems LocǦ pCq on C. These spaces play the role of the
space of frequencies or colors Rt in the spectral theorem, with points labeling all
possible eigenvalues. Just as the sheaf theory we consider on BunG has three main
ﬂavors, the parameters also come in two corresponding ﬂavors.
      ‚ de Rham (Lie algebra) version: LocdR        Ǧ
                                                        parametrizes Ǧ-bundles with a ﬂat
        connection (so for G “ Ǧ “ GLn , rank n ﬂat vector bundles), i.e., an action
        of the Lie algebra of vector ﬁelds, rather than the fundamental group. It
        forms an aﬃne bundle (by forgetting the connection) over a ﬁnite type open
        subset of BunǦ (in fact a twisted version of the cotangent bundle of BunǦ ).
      ‚ Betti (group) version: LocB    Ǧ
                                           is (a variant of) the familiar character variety,
        parametrizing representations of the fundamental group of C into Ǧ. It is
        a quotient (in the stacky sense) by Ǧ of the (mildly singular) aﬃne variety
        of all homomorphisms π1 pCq Ñ Ǧ. Concretely for C of genus g, we can
        write
                                                           źg
             LocǦ pCq “ tA1 , B1 , . . . , Ag , Bg P Ǧ :    rAi , Bi s “ 1u{Ǧ.
                                                           i
                                                   4    ˆ 2g
         Thus for G “ Ǧ “ GL1 this is just pC q , while for genus 1 and G “
         Ǧ “ GLn this is the space of conjugacy classes of commuting matrices.
            The Betti and de Rham versions of LocǦ are the same analytically –
         they are related by an exponential map – but are distinct algebraically. For
         example for GL1 in genus 1 the former is pCˆ q2 and the latter is a C-bundle
         over an elliptic curve (a non-aﬃne surface famously considered by Serre). In
         other words, as far as points (or inﬁnitesimal deformations) are concerned,
         the two are indistinguishable, but when considering families of local systems
         we have to take care. I’ll default to suppressing the distinction.
    4 Or rather, up to the stacky Cˆ of automorphisms, and some “derived correction” to account

for the nontransversality of its deﬁning equation.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                              15


      ‚ étale (restricted variation) version: this was introduced in [AGK` 20], again
        to be a common core for the de Rham and Betti categories and to make
        sense over any ﬁeld. The idea is to keep all that is common to LocB       Ǧ
                                                                                     and
             dR
        LocǦ : they have the same points, and those points have the same deforma-
        tion theory, and so the union of all the formal neighborhoods of all points is
        the same to both. The space Locres   Ǧ
                                                of local systems of restricted variation
        is exactly this union for abelian groups, and a little bigger in general. In
        particular coherent sheaves built in a ﬁnite process out of skyscrapers are
        the same on all three versions.
  As with the automorphic sheaf theory, we will default to the neutral notation
LocǦ for all three ﬂavors of the character variety.
3.5. The statement. Having introduced the main players, we can now state a
(mildly incorrect) version of the GLC:
Theorem ([GR24a, ABC` 24b, CCF` 24, ABC` 24a, GR24b]). There are equiva-
lences of categories
                           ShvpBunG q » QCohpLocǦ q
in the de Rham, Betti and étale settings, as conjectured in [BD, AG15], [BZN18]
and [AGK` 20] respectively.
   In other words, the automorphic sheaves, systems of diﬀerential equations or their
topological monodromy data on BunG , have a spectral decomposition as algebraic
families of vector spaces over the space of Langlands parameters.
   Some quick notes: ﬁrst, the theorem is not quite correct as stated – we will need
to modify our notion of algebraic families due to the singularities of the spaces
LocǦ , replacing QCoh by a more exotic variant IndCohN , see Section 6.1.
   Second, for “functional analytic” purposes we have to work everywhere with
derived categories – though the equivalence is remarkably close to preserving the
more familiar abelian categories of sheaves (in particular the eigensheaves them-
selves really are sheaves and not complexes thereof [FrR25]).
   Third, the theorem as stated is analogous to giving the spectral theorem as an
abstract matching of two sides without specifying its connection to actual eigenval-
ues - in other words, we’re still missing the main point of the whole endeavor, that
this equivalence needs to diagonalize something. This is our next topic.

                    4. Why is it true? The Beating Heart
  We have now seen the rough shape of BunG . But what is so special about it?
And why should we study categorical harmonic analysis on it? Here’s the key idea:
The essence of geometric Langlands:

                 BunG behaves surprisingly like an abelian group.

  This slogan has two deep manifestations that guide the subject:
    ‚ Hecke Operators: On the level of sheaf theory, BunG has a transitive action
       of commuting symmetries.
    ‚ The Hitchin Fibration: On the microlocal level, BunG looks generically like
       a Picard group.
16                                   DAVID BEN-ZVI


   We’ll start with the ﬁrst of these, which explains at a fundamental level the
where the dual group and the duality itself come from. The second, which we pick
up in § 5, is much more geometric (at the cost of working only generically) and lets
us see concretely what eigensheaves look like.
4.1. Local symmetries: Hecke operators. To understand the symmetries of
BunG it’s useful to recall the local origin of the group structure on P icpCq as
addition of divisors. Given a line bundle L and a point x P C, we can modify L
just at x by considering sections that are required to vanish (or allowed to ř     have a
pole) to some order. In other words, we can add a multiple of x to a divisor ni xi
representing L. This gives an action of a copy of Z on P icpCq via L ÞÑ Lpn ¨ xq,
and these actions (for varying x) generate the group structure.
   What is the nonabelian counterpart of this Z? Given a G-bundle P P BunG
and a point x P C we should ﬁrst parametrize all the modiﬁcations of P at x, i.e.,
bundles that are identiﬁed with P away from x. Such modiﬁcations are identiﬁed
with double cosets Gr “ LG` zLG{LG` , i.e. by LG` -orbits (Schubert varieties) on
the aﬃne Grassmannian Gr. A variant of Gaussian elimination shows that this set
of orbits is in bijection with Weyl group orbits of characters of the dual Ť of the torus
T of G (recovering our Z for G “ GL1 ). In other words, the orbits are in bijection
(via the theory of highest weights) with irreducible complex representations of the
Langlands dual group Ǧ, deﬁned combinatorially so as to have the dual torus Ť
and the same Weyl group as G.
   But these modiﬁcations of bundles are more than just a set: we can compose
modiﬁcations. Indeed while double cosets in a group don’t themselves form a group,
the product on the group still has an averaged form on double cosets: convolution
on the group deﬁnes an associative multiplication on functions of double cosets,
known as a Hecke algebra.
   We are interested in linearizing groups using sheaves rather than functions (using
either D-modules or constructible sheaves). Applying this idea to the double coset
space Gr gives rise to the spherical Hecke category
                           Sph “ ShvpGrq “ ShvpGrqLG`
of all sheaves on double cosets for LG` on LG, or more concretely but less sym-
metrically, sheaves on the aﬃne Grassmannian Gr which are equivariant for the
LG` action, or even more concretely, sheaves on Gr which are constant on each
LG` -orbit. In other words, objects in the Hecke category are weighted sums of pos-
sible modiﬁcations of bundles at a point, where the weights are vector spaces. The
Hecke category Sph inherits an associative multiplication from the composition of
modiﬁcations – it forms a monoidal category. Moreover, Sph acts on ShvpBunG q
by convolution operators – the Hecke functors: we replace the value of a sheaf at
P P BunG by its weighted average over bundles diﬀering from P by modiﬁcations
at x.
   In the gauge theoretic description of [KW07], taking place in the linearized (or
“averaged”) setting of quantum ﬁeld theory, Hecke functors are realized as ’t Hooft
line operators – the modiﬁcation of P at x is achieved by creating a prescribed
singularity in gauge ﬁelds at x, which corresponds to creating a magnetic monopole
passing through x.
4.2. Factorization: the source of commutativity. The unmistakable beating
heart of the GLC (and arguably of the Langlands program) is the miraculous
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                              17


commutativity of Hecke modiﬁcations. Hecke algebras in general, being av-
eraged versions of the multiplication in nonabelian groups, have no reason to be
commutative. But the physical picture of monopole operators suggests a diﬀerent
picture for composition, the operator product expansion (OPE): we can perform
successive observations not at the same point, but at nearby points, and then take
a limit as the points collide. Unlike the essential noncommutativity of quantum
mechanics, there’s more room to move operators around each other in higher di-
mensional quantum ﬁeld theory. In the setting of topological quantum ﬁeld theory,
where measurements are constant along deformations, this makes the product of
operators commutative.
   The same idea is familiar in algebraic topology – the reason π2 of a topological
space is abelian, unlike π1 , is that we have room to move two-fold loops (maps from a
disc) into a space around each other. How is this relevant? The aﬃne Grassmannian
Gr is in fact (thanks to its origin as a space of G-bundles on a surface) the two-
fold loop space of the classifying space BG, providing it a homotopy-commutative
multiplication.
   Beilinson and Drinfeld [BD] discovered this mechanism, known as factorization,
at work behind the Hecke category Sph. Namely, rather than performing successive
Hecke modiﬁcations at the same point x P C, we can instead perform the same
modiﬁcations at two nearby points x, y. The topological nature of the spherical
category guarantees that the composition stays locally constant as we slide the
points around each other or take a limit as they collide. The result is that the
convolution product on Sph is actually commutative – Sph forms a symmetric
monoidal category.
   Factorization – an algebraic structure parametrized purely geometrically by con-
ﬁgurations of points on a manifold and their collisions, rather than by conventional
composition maps – was a truly revolutionary discovery, the deepest and most in-
ﬂuential idea to come out of the study of geometric Langlands. Its origins are the
eﬀorts of Segal, Beilinson and Drinfeld to understand the geometric meaning of
operator product expansion in 2d conformal ﬁeld theory (as codiﬁed algebraically
in the theory of vertex algebras), and the close parallels that emerged with the
algebraic theory of iterated loop spaces (such as Gr) in algebraic topology. Once
codiﬁed in [BD04], it has provided a uniform perspective on phenomena in physics,
topology, category theory and number theory. Turning the tables, factorization is
the deﬁning feature of observables in quantum ﬁeld theory in the general mathe-
matical framework developed by Costello and Gwilliam [CG17].
   The commutativity of Hecke operators is arguably the most indispensable aspect
of the Langlands program – without commuting operators to diagonalize there is
no spectral decomposition of automorphic forms. However this commutativity is
proved by a trick, which fails to explain why it’s there or how to turn it into a robust
and malleable principle. Factorization provides precisely this principle, from which
one can deduce the more concrete commutativity by decategoriﬁcation, and it has
now spread to a variety of arithmetic contexts in the work of V. Laﬀorgue, Fargues,
Scholze, Zhu and many others.

4.3. The birth of the dual group. Now that we know the spherical category
is commutative, we should look for a Fourier dual description of Sph in terms
of tensor product rather than convolution. There is already a natural guess: we
noted a bijection between the double cosets Gr “ LG` zLG{LG` and irreducible
18                                  DAVID BEN-ZVI


representations of the Langlands dual reductive group Ǧ. This guess is borne out
in the following theorem:
Theorem (Geometric Satake Correspondence). [Lus83, Gin, MV07]: There is an
equivalence of symmetric monoidal abelian categories Sph♥ » ReppǦq between [the
heart of the] spherical category, equipped with convolution, and the representations
of the Langlands dual group Ǧ, equipped with tensor product.
   Here we’ve passed from derived categories to abelian C-linear categories, so that
Sph♥ consists equivalently of LG` -equivariant D-modules or perverse sheaves on
the aﬃne Grassmanian. It was extended in [MV07] to perverse sheaves (and rep-
resentations of Ǧ) with coeﬃcients in any ﬁeld, or even over the integers. (There’s
also an important but more subtle version for the full derived category [BF08].)
   In fact this theorem is better thought of in reverse: it provides the true deﬁnition
of the Langlands dual group Ǧ. Just as a commutative ring deﬁnes a geometric
object, its spectrum, a commutative tensor category like Sph has a spectrum given
by Tannakian reconstruction. Concretely, we build a group as the automorphism
group of the functor of total cohomology on Sph (which will correspond to the
forgetful functor ReppǦq Ñ V ect). There’s then a tautological tensor functor
from Sph to representations of this group, which we check is an equivalence. The
beautiful geometry of the Grassmannian and its Schubert stratiﬁcation then forces
this group to be reductive and lets us calculate its root data to be combinatorially
dual to that of G.
4.4. Global symmetries: the spectral action. Thanks to the geometric Sa-
take correspondence we now ﬁnd a huge collection of commuting operators on
ShvpBunG q — we get a copy of ReppǦq for every point x P C, and moreover
they all commute with each other. In other words, we’ve identiﬁed      a nonabelian
counterpart to the action of the group of divisors DivpCq “ xPC Z on the Picard
                                                               À
group.
   To put these actions all together we need to identify the relations among these
actions, or geometrically, the spectrum of the “global” Hecke category generated
by all the local actions on ShvpBunG q. The key to this is again contained in the
factorization structure: we can move and collide the points at which we insert
Hecke functors. In other words, we expect that the action of the spherical category
Sphx depends in a locally constant way on the point x of modiﬁcation, and that
performing modiﬁcations at two points that collide is the same as composing mod-
iﬁcations at one point. This informal idea is precisely captured by the notion of
factorization homology. This idea of Beilinson-Drinfeld [BD04], an abstraction
of the theory of conformal blocks of vertex algebras, now provides a hugely inﬂuen-
tial mathematical model for the way global observables in quantum ﬁeld theory are
assembled from local observables [CG17], and provides a powerful multi-purpose
tool in topology and higher algebra [AF15, Lur].
   So the challenge is to describe the globalization (factorization homology) of the
spherical Hecke category as sheaves on some space with tensor product, which will
then act by convolution operators on ShvpBunG q. Again there is a natural guess:
a Ǧ-local system on C is precisely a machine that turns representations of Ǧ into
locally constant families of vector spaces on C. This leads to the following funda-
mental theorem, the automorphic-to-Galois direction of the geometric Langlands
correspondence:
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                            19

                                                       Â
Theorem (The Spectral Action:). The Hecke action of xPC Sphx on ShvpBunG q
factors through an action of QCohpLocǦ pCqq in all the settings (de Rham [Gai15],
Betti [NY19], étale [AGK` 20], Fargues-Fontaine curve [FS21]).
   We are now ﬁnally in a position to really understand the GLC: given the spectral
action, we can now ask for spectral decomposition: what does ShvpBunG q look
like as a module for QCohpLocǦ q? The hope is that this action satisﬁes “quantum
complete integrability”: the joint eigenspaces of all our commuting operators are
multiplicity free, and the spectrum is LocǦ :

     Hope: The spectral action QCohpLocǦ q œ ShvpBunG q is free of rank one

   This hope means that (after some normalization) we expect to get a spectral
theorem ShvpBunG q » QCohpLocǦ q. In other words, spelling out the meaning
of spectral decomposition, we expect that picking a point (the “eigenvalue” or
Langlands parameter) E P LocǦ there exists a unique object (up to scale) AutE P
ShvpBunG q on which all Hecke functors act as they do on a skyscraper at E,
                              F ˚ AutE » F|E b AutE
Up to some details of “getting the functional analysis right” (see §6.1), this is what
has now been proved.
   From the point of view of gauge theory, the geometric Satake correspondence
identiﬁes the natural observables in the theory of G-bundles (the Hecke = ’t Hooft
monopole operators) with those in a dual Ǧ-gauge theory, built out of monodromies
of Ǧ-local systems (Wilson loop operators). The spectral action then asserts that
the global observables on C act on automorphic sheaves on BunG – in other words,
it establishes a version of electric-magnetic duality on the level of observables.

                      5. How can we make it concrete?
   In this section our narrative branches oﬀ on a (co)tangent - we brieﬂy touch on
Hitchin’s integrable system, which makes parts of geometric Langlands much more
geometric and explicit.
5.1. Abelianization. An important lesson from microlocal analysis is that it is
more important to understand phase space (where Wigner distributions and wave-
front sets live) than merely position space. In other words, before embarking on
harmonic analysis there we should really ask what’s special not about BunG but
about the cotangent bundle T ˚ BunG , which is illustrated in Figure 3.
   The cotangent bundle T ˚ BunG itself has a moduli space interpretation, as the
moduli
                 HiggsG pCq “ tP P BunG , η P ΓpC, ad˚ pPq b Ω1C qu
of G-Higgs bundles: these are bundles together with a Higgs ﬁeld, an endomorphism-
valued one-form (section of the coadjoint bundle twisted by 1-forms on C). Again
we treat HiggsG as a stack, and note that it is mildly singular (like LocG ).
   Being a cotangent bundle, HiggsG has a natural symplectic structure. Hitch-
in [Hit87] discovered that it also carries a gorgeous and rareﬁed geometric struc-
ture, that of a completely integrable Hamiltonian system (instances of which re-
cover many of the most studied integrable systems). Let us focus for simplicity
on the case G “ GLn , though the entire theory extends to other groups, see in
20                                  DAVID BEN-ZVI


particular [DM96, DG02]. Namely, we can take the characteristic polynomial of an
endomorphism-valued one-form to deﬁne a map
                                                n
                                                      ΓpC, Ωbi
                                                à
                          Hitch : Higgsn ÝÑ                 C q
                                                i“1

from the moduli of Higgs bundles to a vector space. This map turns out to be a
Lagrangian ﬁbration, and the connected components of generic ﬁbers Hitch´1 pχq
are complex tori (abelian varieties), as seen in the ﬁgure.
   In fact the generic ﬁbers are actually Picard groups (moduli of line bundles) on
curves. The eigenvalues of a Higgs ﬁeld (as a matrix-valued one-form) cut out a
curve Cχ Ă T ˚ C which is an n-fold covers of C. The map Hitch takes the Higgs
ﬁeld to this spectral curve, and the ﬁbers describe the possible eigenspaces for ﬁxed
eigenvalues, generically a line bundle on the spectral curve. On the other hand the
0-ﬁber N ilp “ Hitch´1 p0q, the global nilpotent cone [Lau88], consists of nilpotent
Higgs ﬁelds (see the ﬁgure). This is a reducible variety containing the 0-section
BunG Ă N ilp Ă T ˚ BunG as irreducible component where the Higgs ﬁeld vanishes
identically.
   In other words, the Hitchin ﬁbration manifests BunG as a component of
a degeneration of a Picard group of a curve — so BunG is viscerally close to
being an abelian variety, like it is for GL1 . The idea behind this abelian deformation
of BunG is a geometric implementation of the famous Higgs mechanism for mass
generation and symmetry breaking in gauge theory, using a generic Higgs ﬁeld η to
break the symmetry of a bundle to the centralizer of η.
   Even more strikingly, the spectral side of GLC now starts to look very similar:
after all, connections on a vector bundle are a twisted form of endomorphism-valued
1-forms. Namely, the moduli space LocdR    Ǧ
                                               sits in a one-parameter deformation with
the space HiggsǦ of Ǧ-Higgs bundles. A discovery of Hausel-Thaddeus [HT03] and
Donagi-Pantev [DP12] is that the Hitchin systems for the Langlands dual groups
generically form dual families of abelian varieties over the same vector space – or, in
the language of physics, are mirrors of each other (see the recent review [Hau23]).
Indeed [DP12] proves that – generically over the Hitchin base – we have an equiv-
alence, the Dolbeault GLC,
(5.1)                   QCohpHiggsG q ÐÑ QCohpHiggsǦ q
given by a variant of the Fourier-Mukai transform [Muk81] identifying coherent
sheaves on dual abelian varieties. This suggests that the GLC should manifest as
a form of mirror symmetry, as was indeed conﬁrmed in [KW07]. It is also closely
related to Donaldson-Thomas and geometric invariant theory, leading to a new
more controlled form of the Dolbeault conjecture [PT25].

5.2. Abelianization of sheaves. How does the geometry of the Hitchin system
relate to the theory of automorphic sheaves?
   An important insight coming out of algebraic analysis is that sheaves, just like
generalized functions, have a microlocal nature, with a support in phase space.
As a consequence one could approach the GLC (as ﬁrst suggested by Donagi) by
abelianization: reduce the study of sheaf theory on BunG “generically” to the case
of GL1 using the geometry of the Hitchin ﬁbration.
   Here’s the picture: in Fourier theory the monochromatic waves, the exponentials
eiλx , are localized in momentum space, so look microlocally like lines tt “ λu Ă R2x,t .
                    THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                                    21




         Figure 3. The Hitchin ﬁbration of the moduli of Higgs bundles,
         illustrating the zero ﬁber (the nilpotent cone, including BunG ) and
         Hutchins section (microsupport of the Whittaker sheaf).

Likewise we might expect that the sought-after eigensheaves, the “monochromatic”
sheaves on BunG , should be localized microlocally along Hitchin ﬁbers,5 and so
accessible by abelian duality.
   In their monumental work [BD] establishing the GLC as we know it, Beilinson
and Drinfeld showed that Hitchin’s hamiltonians can be quantized to diﬀerential
operators on BunG , allowing one to explicitly write down the diﬀerential equations
(D-modules) on BunG corresponding to constant sheaves on Hitchin ﬁbers (without
any winding).
   There have since been several approaches to making the microlocal picture of
more general eigensheaves precise.
   ‚ [Asymptotics] First, diﬀerential operators have a semiclassical limit, where
they degenerate to their symbols, functions on phase space. This suggests the
following idea, developed by Arinkin [Ari05]:
     DmodpBunG q ù QCohpHiggsG q ÐÑ QCohpHiggsǦ q ø QCohpLocǦ q
Passing to symbols degenerates D-modules on BunG into quasicoherent sheaves on
HiggsG . We then use the Dolbeault GLC (5.1) to pass from HiggsG to HiggsǦ ,
and ﬁnally deform from HiggsǦ to LocǦ . This gives a “generic, asymptotic” piece
of the GLC. Alternatively, reducing diﬀerential operators modulo a prime p also
    5 A coarser, asymptotic version of this statement is that eigensheaves should have the global

nilpotent cone N ilp as their characteristic variety [Lau87].
22                                 DAVID BEN-ZVI


has the eﬀect of a classical limit (since pth derivatives vanish mod p), and one can
formulate and prove an analogous piece of geometric Langlands there [BB07, CZ17].
   ‚ [Fukaya categories and microlocal sheaves:] Kapustin-Witten proposed that
automorphic sheaves be viewed in the context of symplectic geometry and mirror
symmetry as A-branes, i.e. objects of the Fukaya category, on T ˚ BunG . These
objects are precisely represented by Lagrangians – for example, Hitchin ﬁbers
– equipped with local systems. This had a tremendous inﬂuence on the subse-
quent understanding of Fukaya categories via microlocal sheaf theory [NZ09,Nad09,
Kon09, GPS24]. We’ll see these ideas appear in the proof of GLC, § 6.3.
   ‚ [Nonabelian Hodge theory:] The nonabelian Hodge correspondence on a vari-
ety X uses harmonic map theory to identify suitable ﬂat connections, or more gen-
eral D-modules, with Higgs bundles, or coherent sheaves on T ˚ X. Applying these
ideas to X “ BunG leads to a program by Donagi-Pantev-Simpson [DP22, DPS24]
to produce the monochromatic D-modules from line bundles on Hitchin ﬁbers.

                              6. How is it proved?
  In this section I’ll describe some of the main ideas that go into the proof of the
GLC – starting with getting the exact statement right.
6.1. First, some functional analysis. Since the GLC is concerned with a form
of harmonic analysis in which categories of sheaves replace traditional function
spaces, we should encounter echos of familiar analytic issues – and conversely, GLC
provides a testing ground for this new kind of categorical analysis. As with the
harmonic analysis of locally symmetric spaces, the leading issue comes from the
lack of (quasi)compactness – i.e., what kind of growth conditions should we impose
at the cusps? What classes of “topological vector spaces” do these choices lead
to, and what kind of duality and operator theory do they carry? What do these
questions even mean in the categorical setting??
   These questions were developed in the series of papers of Gaitsgory with Drin-
feld and Arinkin including [DG13, DG15, Gai16, Gai17b, AG15], based on the gen-
eral categorical machinery developed by Lurie [Lur09, Lur]. On the one hand,
they established that the basic function space in the de Rham GLC, the category
DmodpBunG q, behaves “miraculously” like a categorical Hilbert space - in partic-
ular is self-dual.
   On the other hand, the naive guess for the spectral side needs to be reﬁned. In
Fourier theory, lack of compact support is dual to lack of smoothness. Thus if we
choose not to impose any growth conditions on our sheaves on BunG we should
expect to see singularities appearing in the sheaf theory on LocǦ - i.e., some kind
of vector-space valued “distributions” rather than “functions”. As it turns out this
distinction on the level of sheaves is intimately related to the singularities of the
underlying space LocǦ .
   This has led to a new chapter in algebraic geometry, the theory of ind-coherent
sheaves IndCoh [GR17]. The category IndCoh expands QCoh to allow algebraic
generalized functions. As with distributions, these new objects can be described
as representing functionals on “test” objects, in this case, as functors on coherent
sheaves. The diﬀerence between IndCoh and QCoh comes down to the fact that
coherent sheaves on singular varieties – for example, skyscrapers at singular points
– don’t admit ﬁnite resolutions by vector bundles, or more geometrically, can’t be
extended to any inﬁnitesimal deformation of the variety. This leads to the notion
                   THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                            23


of singular support of ind-coherent sheaves, a precise counterpart of the wave-front
sets of distributions, which measures the points and deformation directions where
a given generalized sheaf is obstructed.
    By analyzing the behavior of singular supports under natural operations on
sheaves, [AG15] were able to ﬁne-tune exactly what kinds of singularities of ind-
coherent sheaves match the given sheaf theory on the automorphic side: we should
allow nilpotent singular support – meaning roughly that we don’t allow any singular-
ities in directions coming from tori (as in the previously understood case of GL1 ).
This ﬁnally leads to a precise statement of the unramiﬁed geometric Langlands
conjecture: it’s an equivalence
                            ShvpBunG q » IndCohN pLocǦ q
(in each of the three ﬂavors de Rham, Betti and étale) identifying the spectral action
of QCohpLocǦ q on the left with its natural tensor action (multiplying distributions
by functions) on the spectral side.
    An important advance of [AGK` 20] was the proof that the Betti and de Rham
versions of GLC are equivalent, by showing they both reduce to the common core
étale version. This lets us play oﬀ advantages of the two settings – for example the
Betti character stack LocB  Ǧ
                               is very simple, as the quotient of an aﬃne variety by
Ǧ, while the de Rham version LocdR   Ǧ
                                         is far from aﬃne, meaning that Hom spaces
between coherent sheaves are ﬁnite dimensional.

6.2. Interlude: Relative Langlands, or, Where have all the L-functions
gone? The Langlands philosophy doesn’t just predict a relation between automor-
phic and spectral sides diagonalizing Hecke operators: it comes equipped with a
huge repertoire of predictions for which measurements should match which. The
study of these measurements is known as the relative Langlands program, and was
systematized in [SV17]. The most famous – the matching of automorphic and
Galois L-functions – is arguably the main feature of the arithmetic Langlands pro-
gram. L-functions themselves are conspicuously absent from most of the literature
on the GLC, but similar matching measurements play a major role in normalizing,
characterizing and proving the GLC.
   What do we mean by a measurement of automorphic forms? These are linear
functionals on the vector space of automorphic forms — though we can (and will)
think of them dually, as represented by inner product with a particular vector,
or in the geometric context, as Hom spaces from a particular sheaf. The special
measurements we can make predictions for – the periods 6 – are highly structured:
they have counterparts in all the diﬀerent settings of the Langlands program (lo-
cal, global, arithmetic and geometric) and vary well in families. In physics, such
structured collections of measurements or states is an essential part of any quan-
tum ﬁeld theory, where they correspond to boundary theories (or codimension one
defects). In the context of electric-magnetic S-duality their study was pioneered
by Gaiotto-Witten [GW09b, GW09a], and proposed as a general framework for the
relative Langlands program in [BZSV24].
   A basic example is the trivial period – the constant or zero-frequency wave, which
corresponds to the simplest measurement: taking the average of an automorphic
form or global cohomology of an automorphic sheaf. This period is already very

  6 Confusingly, not to be confused with periods in algebraic geometry.
24                                   DAVID BEN-ZVI


interesting in the context of GLC. It was studied in in [GL19] and used to prove
Weil’s Tamagawa Number conjecture for function ﬁelds.
   In the next three sections, we will look at three important types of measure-
ments, or periods, whose interplay provides the backbone of the proof of GLC (to
paraphrase [CCF` 24]). Here we list the names of the matching automorphic and
spectral measurements and their primary role:
      ‚ Eisenstein Ø Eisenstein: used to reduce the GLC by induction to its core,
         the cuspidal case.
      ‚ Whittaker Ø global sections (Neumann): used for normalization - provides
         a faithful measurement of cuspidal automorphic sheaves.
      ‚ Kac-Moody Ø opers: Used for the construction of cuspidal automorphic
         sheaves.
   Perhaps the most crucial feature of periods is that they satisfy a strong local-to-
global compatibility – they are given as Θ-series. The Θ-series (or Poincaré series)
are generalizations of the classical Riemann θ-function appearing for example in
Riemann’s integral formula for ζpsq. They are modular and automorphic forms
that are written as averages of local data over a global symmetry group. This in
fact provides the most common way to write down automorphic forms.
   One of the most important features of L-functions is their “local-to-global” de-
scription as Euler products. In the geometric setting, periods have a loosely analo-
gous key property – factorization, again. Namely we can attach Θ-series to local
data at ﬁnitely many points of the curve C, and the construction is compatible
with collisions of points. This factorization property is the glue that lets us as-
semble local inputs into a comprehensible global output. It is also technically very
challenging – a major reason for the length of the proof of GLC (and many of its
predecessors) is the need to understand holistically local, global and factorizable
versions of all the constructions.
6.3. Normalization: the Whittaker period. We know that an eigenvector is
determined by the corresponding eigenvalue only up to scale, at best, hence the
need for normalization. For the Fourier transform, we normalize the eigenfunctions
– scalar multiples of exponential functions – to have value 1 at x “ 0, i.e., by their
pairing with a delta-function δ0 at x “ 0. This delta-function represents white light
– it is a superposition of all colors, with Fourier transform the constant function 1.
This normalization extends readily to more general abelian dualities – we normalize
eigenfunctions by evaluating at the unit. In other words we stipulate that the
duality sends the delta-function δe at the unit (a Dirichlet boundary condition) to
the constant function 1 (a Neumann boundary condition). This is illustrated (in
the case of the Mellin transform) in Figure 1 by the white pole corresponding to
the white ﬁeld.
   In nonabelian duality, the role of white light is played by a less familiar object, the
Whittaker7 period (or Nahm pole boundary condition [GW09a]). Thus we stipulate
that duality sends the Whittaker period to the spectral measurement given by total
integral or global sections (i.e., to the Neumann boundary condition). In other
words, the sought-after duality should take the representing object, the Whittaker
sheaf, to the structure sheaf OLocǦ representing spectral global sections.

  7 Named after the mathematician Sir Edmund Whittaker. Whittaker (from Old English),

meaning: White Field.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                             25


   What is this Whittaker sheaf? If we think microlocally, it has an appealing
geometric description, illustrated in Figure 3 – it is represented by the Hitchin
section [Hit92]. This is a section of the Hitchin integrable system consisting of those
Higgs ﬁelds which are in rational cyclic form as matrices for G “ GLn (or more
generally lie in Kostant’s reductive-group generalization of rational cyclic form).
These correspond to spectral curves equipped with a trivial line bundle, i.e., the
identity elements of the Hitchin ﬁbers. A key diﬀerence from the abelian case, also
visible in the ﬁgure, is that the Hitchin section completely misses the zero-section
BunG Ă T ˚ BunG (since the zero matrix doesn’t admit a cyclic vector).
   Once we’ve picked out the Whittaker sheaf, we can start to act on it by Hecke
functors. (Microlocally, this means we move the Hitchin section around by trans-
lation along the Hitchin ﬁbers). Thanks to the spectral action, this assignment
determines a functor
                QCohpLocǦ q Ñ ShvpBunG q,          F ÞÑ F ˚ W hitG
sending the structure sheaf OLocǦ to the Whittaker sheaf. If we really expected
the automorphic side to be free of rank one over the spectral action, this would be
the GLC.
   However we know this functor can’t be quite right – we need to ﬁx the spectral
side to the slightly bigger category IndCohN pLocǦ q. This requires some careful
analysis. The papers [FrR25,NT25] used the microlocal interpretation to show some
surprisingly nice properties of Whittaker coeﬃcients (the measurement represented
by the Whittaker sheaf) including exactness on a large subcategory of sheaves.
These results are combined with further estimates in [GR24a] (concerning cohomo-
logical boundedness and categorical compactness) to show that testing automorphic
sheaves against ones of the form F ˚ W hitG (F P QCpLocǦ q) lifts uniquely to a
functor in the opposite direction
                                        L   / IndCohN pLoc q
                     ShvpBunG q
                               UUUU                         Ǧ
                                   UUUU
                                       UUUU
                                           UUUU
                                                *   
                                                QCpLocǦ q.

6.4. The Inductive Step: Eisenstein series. Eisenstein series are simultane-
ously the easy and the hard part of the theory of automorphic forms. On the one
hand, the serious need for analysis comes from the continuous spectrum of mod-
ular curves (and more general arithmetic locally symmetric spaces), an eﬀect of
their lack of compactness – i.e., from functions not vanishing at inﬁnity (i.e., at the
cusps). The theory of Eisenstein series provides a construction of this continuous
spectrum.
   On the other hand, representation theoretically Eisenstein series provides the
“non-mysterious” part of the theory – the part coming by parabolic induction. This
is an elaboration of highest-weight theory which lets us build representations of big
groups from those of smaller Levi subgroups (for GLn these are the subgroups of
diagonal or block-diagonal matrices). The guiding light of representation theory
of reductive groups, Harish-Chandra’s philosophy of cusp forms, says that for each
group we should ﬁrst sift out the families (or series) of representations coming by
parabolic induction from smaller groups, leaving only the rare gems – the cuspidal
representations – which we then carry with us on our journey to ever larger groups.
26                                     DAVID BEN-ZVI


   The entire Langlands program follows this inductive pattern: it dictates that the
construction of Eisenstein series from Levi subgroups M Ă G should match with
a similar parabolic induction for the dual Levi subgroup M̌ Ă Ǧ, which precisely
accounts for the locus of reducible Langlands parameters. This construction is no
small feat – Langlands’ analytic theory of Eisenstein series for reductive groups is
one of the most important and challenging chapters in the entire theory of automor-
phic forms. Thus very roughly once we “subtract” the contributions of Eisenstein
series we’re reduced to understanding their complement, the cuspidal automorphic
forms (those with vanishing Eisenstein periods), and match them with irreducible
Langlands parameters.
   To make a long and technical story criminally short, the theory of Eisenstein
series is now very well understood in the geometric setting along these general pat-
terns, following decades of contributions by Drinfeld, Laumon, Braverman, Gaits-
gory, Finkelberg, Mirkovic, Bezrukavnikov and others. The monograph [CCF` 24]
completes the inductive step, showing in particular the compatibility of Eisenstein
series with the Langlands functor L as above. With this in hand, the proof of GLC
reduces to the study of the orthogonal complement of Eisenstein series, the cuspidal
automorphic sheaves.
6.5. Construction: Kac-Moody localization and opers. Finally, we need to
ﬁnd some rare gems – cuspidal automorphic sheaves. A lot of them, in fact, to
account for all irreducible Langlands parameters. As we mentioned, the main tech-
nique to actually write down automorphic forms is the theory of Θ-series – i.e., to
start with local data and average. The ace up the sleeve of the de Rham geometric
Langlands discovered by Beilinson and Drinfeld is a particular type of geometric
Θ-series, the Kac-Moody period, which has a concrete dual description in terms of
opers. This construction diﬀers from all the topics we have discussed in that it does
not have any known direct counterpart in other parts of the Langlands program.
   Why is it so elusive? The answer is that while the entire de Rham GLC is based
on representation theory of Lie algebras rather than Lie groups, the Kac-Moody pe-
riod in particular concerns representations that do not integrate to the group, such
as the action of g on its enveloping algebra U g itself. This kind of representation
has no counterpart in the Betti or étale GLC or indeed in the smooth representation
theory of p-adic groups, the topic of the local Langlands correspondence.8
   Another form of the answer comes from physics: the Kac-Moody period is not
topological – it is sensitive to the complex structure on our Riemann surface C.
As such it is related to the much richer study of conformal or holomorphic quan-
tum ﬁeld theory rather than the relatively well understood topological ﬁeld the-
ory [FG20].
   So what is this Kac-Moody period about? The global version is (up to a correc-
tion coming from spin structures) the sheaf of diﬀerential operators DBunG itself
– a very natural object but one that has no analog in the topological world of
monodromies and constructible sheaves. The local version is the category of repre-
sentations of the loop Lie algebra gppzqq, or (after correction by a central extension)
the category of critical level representations of the aﬃne Kac-Moody algebra g  p. The
local-to-global construction (Θ-series) is given by one of the classics of geometric
representation theory, Beilinson-Bernstein localization construction: a method of
   8 There are however counterparts in the rapidly developing world of locally analytic (p-adic)

representations of p-adic groups.
                  THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                           27


writing systems of diﬀerential equations prescribed by representations of a Lie al-
gebra. Through this construction, representation theory provides a wealth of fairly
concrete D-modules on BunG , which Beilinson and Drinfeld realized was the secret
recipe for building a Langlands correspondence.
    What does representation theory have to oﬀer here? The starter for this recipe
is a miraculous theorem of Feigin and Frenkel [FF92] (see also the book [Fre07]),
using the approach to loop algebras suggested by conformal ﬁeld theory, the theory
of vertex algebras. They found a form of Langlands correspondence for the critical
level representations: they are parametrized by a kind of Langlands parameter
called an oper for the dual group Ǧ. Opers (in the case of GLn ) are connections
with a choice of cyclic vector for diﬀerentiation – i.e., connections which are in
rational cyclic form. These are exactly the ﬁrst order systems of n diﬀerential
equations in one variable we get when we want to solve a single n-th order ODE.
    In [BD], the Feigin-Frenkel theorem is globalized to provide a spectral decompo-
sition of some D-modules – those generated by the object DBunG itself – over the
variety of Ǧ-opers on the curve. This variety is a dual, spectral counterpart of the
Whittaker period – a version of Hitchin’s section for the space of ﬂat connections.
    But this is just the beginning: any irreducible local system admits the structure
of an oper away from ﬁnitely many points [Ari16]. Moreover up to homotopy
there’s only one such choice (a theorem of [BKS22] for classical groups) – the space
of choices is contractible. On the other hand, the many-point factorizable version of
the localization construction produces enough D-modules to “span” [the cuspidal
part of] sheaves on BunG . Now we’re cooking.
    In [ABC` 24b] these ingredients are built into a highly structured machine to
populate the automorphic side with D-modules coming from Kac-Moody local-
ization, and the spectral side with matching sheaves coming from local systems
with oper structure. This gives a rich enough repertory of matching objects to see
the “surjectivity” of the Langlands functor. On the other hand, Faergeman and
Raskin [FrR25] discovered the key injectivity property: sheaf-theoretic Whittaker
coeﬃcients don’t vanish on cuspidal sheaves. Namely, we can test any cuspidal
sheaf faithfully against the Whittaker sheaf and its Hecke translates, so it won’t
be annihilated by the functor L. Putting all these ingredients together — the
construction of the Langlands functor [GR24a], the Eisenstein series constructions
ﬁlling out the continuous spectrum [CCF` 24], and more subtle functional analysis
of the Langlands functor (it is ambidexterous) [ABC` 24a] — results in the proof
in [GR24b] that the Langlands functor is indeed an equivalence and the unramiﬁed
GLC holds.

                                 7. What’s Next
   Thus after a herculean eﬀort the unramiﬁed geometric Langlands correspondence
is now a theorem. But as I’ve tried to emphasize the point of the endeavor was not
solely or even primarily verifying the truth of a particular statement. The long se-
quence of papers culminating in the proof doesn’t try to follow a geodesic path, but
rather surrounds the statement and besieges it before eventually breaking in. The
proof is instead a major benchmark of our understanding of representation theory
and harmonic analysis, the ﬁrst time a nonabelian duality statement this exhaus-
tive and general has been proved. It demonstrates that as a community we have
understood the overarching features of nonabelian duality and have an adequate
28                                 DAVID BEN-ZVI


conceptual framework, centered around factorization, to carry this understanding to
new contexts. Indeed the main ingredients in the proof - with the critical exception
of the magic of opers and Kac-Moody representations - are essentially portable.
    So where do we go from here? Broadly speaking, we can stay put and explore
further, move towards number theory, or move towards physics. In the arithmetic
direction, the immediate beneﬁciary of the progress on GLC is the theory of auto-
morphic forms on function ﬁelds, § 2.4, where many of the big structural questions
feel within sight. Another is the local Langlands correspondence § 2.3, now under-
stood as a variant of the unramiﬁed GLC in more exotic settings. Yet another is
the relative Langlands program § 6.2, motivated by the theory of L-functions.
    If we choose to stay put, the unramiﬁed GLC has both a degeneration, the
Dolbeault GLC (§ 5.2), and a deformation, the quantum GLC, that remain open.
Both have the beautiful feature that they are completely symmetric in G and Ǧ, and
both appear naturally from the same 4d gauge theory origin (S-duality for N “ 4
super-Yang-Mills) as the GLC. The latter provides a global geometric context for
the representation theory of aﬃne Kac-Moody algebras (de Rham) and quantum
groups (Betti).
    More ambitiously, the local GLC provides a conjectural spectral decomposition
for the categorical representation theory of loop groups in terms of Langlands pa-
rameters given by local systems on the circle . It is fully understood only in the
tame setting (corresponding to local systems with regular singularities), thanks to
Bezrukavnikov’s landmark extension of the geometric Satake correspondence men-
tioned in § 2.2, but that is changing rapidly (see [Gai25]).
    The local GLC in turn is the glue needed to formulate the full ramiﬁed GLC.
The latter provides a spectral decomposition for categories of sheaves on moduli of
bundles equipped with level structure (such as trivializations) near several points
of the curve: these categories carry loop group actions around the punctures, and
the expectation is that they can be described, under the local GLC, in terms of
spaces of local systems on the punctured curve.
    What does moving towards physics entail? From the point of view of topolog-
ical QFT following [KW07] (see [BZN18]), one expects an equivalence AG » BǦ
between two 4d TQFTs, an automorphic theory associated to G and a spectral
theory associated to Ǧ. The unramiﬁed Betti GLC and local GLC are expected
to arise by evaluating these TQFTs on C and S 1 , respectively. The B-side TQFT
is fairly well understood, while the A-side is quite mysterious. However, thanks to
the proof of GLC we now know remarkable TQFT properties of the categories of
automorphic sheaves AG pCq “ ShvN pBunG pCqq: for example, they are acted on
by the mapping class group of C and satisfy simple cut-and-paste rules. However
there is far more structure in the equivalence of TQFTs than has been spelled out
so far, especially once we allow defects such as boundary theories (as in § 6.2).
    Most strikingly, it follows from the proof of GLC that there is a well-deﬁned
vector space AG pM q of “automorphic forms on a 3-manifold M ”, which can be
calculated in terms of categories of automorphic sheaves on surfaces using tech-
niques such as Heegaard splittings. It also satisﬁes a Langlands duality identifying
it with (a stacky, derived enhancement of) the space of functions on the character
variety LocǦ pM q (space of representations of π1 pM q into Ǧ). We know very little
about these spaces directly, but after deforming to the quantum GLC these spaces
become the famous skein modules of 3-manifolds associated to quantum groups,
                    THE GEOMETRIC LANGLANDS CORRESPONDENCE                                  29


see the review [Jor23]. Another place where the categorical complexity of geomet-
ric Langlands gives way to concrete isomorphisms of vector spaces is the analytic
Langlands correspondence [EFK21], a remarkable spectral decomposition for quan-
tum integrable systems which can be viewed physically (following [GW24]) as an
instance of the equivalence AG » BǦ on a special 3d conﬁguration.
    Finally, it is good to recall (§ 2.5) that by looking at topological QFT we’ve really
only seeing a shadow of the full physical S-duality: we have taken a conjectured
equivalence of QFTs and passed to cohomology for some diﬀerential, provided to
us thanks to supersymmetry. The analog for Maxwell theory (the case G “ GL1 )
is forgetting everything about electromagnetism except for Gauss’ law.
    What more does the physical theory have to oﬀer the Langlands program? I
will close with one suggestion. On a Riemann surface C, the supersymmetric QFT
senses the hyperkähler metric geometry of the moduli of Higgs bundles T ˚ BunG ,
while the topological theory only sees its holomorphic symplectic structure. On the
level of categories of sheaves, this allows the physics to distinguish special objects,
the 1/2 BPS branes, which are roughly D-modules carrying Hodge structures – the
de Rham avatar of motivic sheaves. Motivic sheaves, like supersymmetric branes,
have many diﬀerent realizations – rather than picking a cohomology theory (de
Rham, Betti, Dolbeault, étale) we can try them all at once. They have recently
come to prominence in the setting of categorical local Langlands [Sch25]. Much
more broadly, understanding motives themselves is one of the main motivations
for the entire Langlands program. It’s tempting to dream that the physics of
supersymmetry and S-duality might have something to say about some of these
profound questions.


