- So good afternoon. I'm Dan Freed. It's my pleasure to
welcome you to this sixth of seven lectures about the
Millennium Prize problems. As you know, these problems
were proposed at the turn of the millennium 25 years ago, and we're having this lecture series to celebrate these problems
and to learn about progress. The series is jointly sponsored by the Harvard Mathematics Department, by the Harvard Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications, and by the Clay Mathematics Institute. We're very happy to have one
of my core organizers here, Martin Bridson, who's president of the Clay Mathematics Institute, third co-organizer Mike
Hopkins is out of town today. So today we have Javier Gómez-Serrano. He's at Brown University, and he's going to tell us about Navier-Stokes Existence or Breakdown. - Thank you. Yeah, so thank you everyone
for coming to this lecture. And yeah, thank you Dan and Martin and all the organizers
for inviting me here to give this lecture. And I have to admit that
when I saw the list, I was dubious, like why
did they talk to me? Because the list is
frankly quite impressive. So yeah, thanks a lot
for really counting on me for this job. And yeah, I was told that I should give a
talk to a broad audience. I still don't know what
that is, so I'll try to give a talk in a way that everybody gets something out of it. Okay? So bear with me and if it is too easy, stay until the end and we'll see. Okay. So my plan for today is
to talk about progress or recent progress in particular about the Navier-Stokes
Existence or Breakdown problem, which is one, as you know, one of the seven Clay Prize problems. So yeah, 25 years ago, I mean, I wasn't doing math or I was doing maybe a very different kind of math, the Clay Institute kind of bet one million with all the mathematicians in the world that we couldn't solve this problem. And well, so far, I came here to report that they're winning. And if we were to adjust for inflation and for the number of mathematicians and we divide by that, then
this is roughly about, yeah, three cents per failure attempt. So especially now these days. So this is the good
thing about this problem is that it has really gotten
a lot of momentum lately and people or the community
is very, very excited and there is a lot of things going on, and I hope to convince you
that this is maybe a good time to follow this problem or even try to do
something along the lines of this direction because really things are getting quite hot in this field, okay? So hopefully in less than 25 years maybe this problem gets solved. Okay, so I'm going to start like giving like an extremely broad
overview of what the history of this problem has been. And I'll start from Leonardo. So Leonardo, 1500, was the first person who was looking at fluids and he even coined the term turbulence, which in Italian he coined "turbolenza" and he wrote it in his book. So on the left, we can see his drawings of water like in a pool and really kind of capturing
these sort of eddies at very different scales
as the water moves. So he was in a sense
seeing how the water went from large scales to small scales. And he even writes about it
saying, observe the motion of the surface of the water,
which resembles that of hair. The water has eddying
motions, one part of which is due to the principle current and the other to the
random and reverse motion. Okay, so in a way he
was seeing some kind of multi-scale phenomena, at well, in 1500 and he was trying to describe
what he was seeing with words. So it took, well more than 400 years, to kind of formalize this kind of theory or these kind of
observations in particular by Kolmogorov in the 1940s. Okay, well Leonardo was kind of putting in writing what each of us can see when we look at the water. A few hundred years later, Bernoulli kind of again
based on like observations that if you had like higher velocity, this is related to having lower pressure. And in particular, this
explains why airplane wings generate lift and he wrote about it in his PDE, Hydrodynamica. Then d'Alembert, 1752, tried to explain the drag and he was arguing that
if you had a fluid, which is frictionless, it
doesn't have any viscosity, then you should expect zero drag. But on the other hand,
he was seeing that ships were having some drag, so he was not able to explain sort of why he was
seeing something in nature and why the equations were sort of suggesting something else. So Euler then a few years after wrote in fact this is what is now known as the Euler equation, was
the second PDE ever written by Euler where he described
the motion of fluid. Or in, again, the same setting where there is no viscosity, there is no friction
against the particles. And this would correspond,
let's say later on to what we know as the
Navier-Stokes equation with the viscosity set to zero. So the Euler equation,
it's a very close cousin to the Navier-Stokes equation in the context of no viscosity. And then Prandtl many, many years later, this is at the beginning
of the 20th century, explained the d'Alembert paradox by formalizing or
describing what is now known as boundary layer theory. So that even if you have
a little bit of viscosity, a little bit of a viscus layer,
you're going to have drag. So these were mostly observations or the very early beginning of let's say the mathematical foundations of the mathematical fluid
mechanics as we know them now. Okay, so these are the
Euler, incompressible Euler and the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations. And we're going to see several terms here. On the right hand side, rho is density, let's take rho to be one. P is the pressure, nu is the viscosity, and F is some external forces. So on the right hand side,
we see external forces. On the left hand side,
essentially we see acceleration. So we're going to see something of the type F equals MA
corresponding to the second, the second Newton's law. And the second equation
essentially describes the incompressibility condition. So the divergence of the
velocity is equal to zero, the fluid, it conserves the volume, or if I were to sort of squish my fluid, then I cannot really compress it or sort of either towards
itself or towards the outside. So moving on, I'm going to be talking about the Euler equations whenever I set nu in this
equation there to be equal to zero, and I'm going to be talking about Navier-Stokes equations whenever I set nu to be any positive real number. Okay, so as I said before, this is essentially describing F equals MA in the context of a fluid. Okay? So at every point what we are looking here being modeled is that at every point in time and at every point in space,
if I look at the forces on a small fluid elements
coming from the pressure coming from external
forces such as gravity, coming from friction
against the particles, that balance of forces has
to balance the acceleration of the particles at that
point in space time. And if I were to write and develop the equation F
is equal to MA, then I get what we saw on the previous slide, okay? Now the heart of the matter and what really makes this a challenge is the non-linear term. If the PDE was linear, then probably we would have a
better understanding by now. But the fact that there
is a nonlinear term essentially doesn't help or raises the question
whether you may have finite time blow up or if things are sort of aligned the proper way. And so you would have
the derivative in time of U is essentially like U squared and therefore you will
get finite time blow up or on the other hand that things
don't really align so well. And even though you have
a quadratic structure, it's still going to prevent or any sort of blow up is
never going to happen due to the particular nature
of the quadratic structure. So the velocity is going to influence or the velocity field
is going to influence the derivative in time
of the velocity field. The equations are nonlinear. Again, that really makes the
analysis quite challenging. And on the other hand, if you start with small perturbations,
this can lead into like big, big changes in the
evolution of the fields, let's say for a much longer time. OSo that's part of,
let's say the main body, the main F is equal to MA description of the equation. And then we have on the other hand the divergence free condition. So the second equation
divergence of U is equal to zero accounts for incompressibility. And as I said, sort of
if I were to have a fluid and if I were to exert some kind of force or some kind of pressure on
the particles in one direction, then I cannot really sort of
arrange my particles in a way that they're going to sort
of collide onto each other. If I try to do that, then they're going to sort of escape in another direction. I cannot really sort of put or arrange things in a way that they all sort of try to get together. If two particles try to get together, then there may be some escape route due to the incompressibility condition. It's not like for example, in a gas, where we can compress the gas and sort of create maybe
some implosion phenomena or any sort of like blow up behavior coming from the
compressibility of such gas. So many physicists have looked
at the problem of turbulence. I won't be talking at all
about turbulence today, but also just to point out
the connection between fluids and turbulence. And I think this is kind
of gathered quite well by sort of these two citations and it's also a testament of
the difficulty of the problem from many physicists back then, but even many physicists now. So Feynman said that turbulence
is the most important unsolved problem in classical physics and Lamb, even though
sometimes this is attributed to Heisenberg said that
if I died, if he died and he went to heaven, he
would want to know about QED and he would also want
to know about turbulence in the context of fluids. But he then added that
about the former problem, he was rather optimistic
implying that turbulence is quite difficult and it's
difficult to get a hold of it and understand it. Okay, so here's the million dollar problem in a kind of a summarized form as stated in the 2000 version of the Clay problems, this was written by Charlie
Fefferman for the CMI and essentially it says the following. So if I take the PDE
that I described before with some initial data, smooth, and I look at the evolution of that data either in the whole space in R3 or on a periodic box in T3, then either one of these options is going to happen, for all time, for all initial data, the
solution is going to be smooth and therefore, life is good. So nothing bad is going to happen. Nothing is going to become infinity, there won't be any singularities no matter how long the time. So that's option one. And then option two is that maybe I can cook up some initial data such that which is again, smooth such that as I evolve the PDE starting
from that initial data, then a singularity is
going to be developed and a singularity means either velocity or derivatives of velocity are going to become infinite in finite time. And we can think of like
kind of the mental model as maybe some kind of vortex
emerging from the fluid or maybe the formation of a tornado or other sort of phenomena that we see everyday in nature corresponding to some
sort of abrupt change in either the velocity or the derivatives of velocity. So it's either A or B, either everything is good or something is bad, okay? And this is kind of a rendition to the way the problem was set up 25 years ago, okay? And as I said in the
beginning, nobody has been able to decide whether the
outcome is either option A or option B with the other thing that this is like a
really, really old problem. So Euler is 250 years old, the Euler equation is 250 plus years old. The Navier-Stokes equations
are roughly 200 plus years old. So this problem understanding
this kind of equation has been open for more than 200 years, both in the context of
Euler and the context of Navier-Stokes despite the setting and the writeup of the problem
being just for Navier-Stokes. But the case of Euler is also open, let's say, in the general form. Okay, so there are three
basic scenarios here that I'm going to be describing and I will say more about them before. So I talked about two because that's the way the
Clay problem was set up. But the community has
kind of been looking at sort of three possibilities
or three different scenarios. The first one is the easy one,
which means that you start with a smooth solution, everything is good and the equation can be
continued for all time and nothing bad happens. So this is sort of the
green scenario on the left. The second scenario is there may be two solutions or there may
be a problem in the form of a singularity, but nonetheless, there is uniqueness of solutions. So the solution may develop singularities, but there is uniqueness of solutions. And the scenario three,
which is even more radical, is that there are singularities. And on top of that,
there is no uniqueness. So the Clay problem
essentially sort of asks whether the situation was
either one or two or three or one versus two or three. And then there is sort of
a slightly different setup that I'm going to talk in the next slides. That is kind of the point
of view from Ladyzhenskaya where she suggested that
instead of that the way or another way to looking at
this problem was either one, one or two, sorry, versus three. So she was essentially kind
of raising the question of non-uniqueness. Either solutions are
unique and then there may or may not be singularities or they are non-unique as in case three. So I'm also going to be
talking about weak solutions and I'm going to be defining
what a weak solution is. So a weak solution is a
weaker notion of a solution and essentially is that in
order to require the solution to solve point wise the PDE,
what we're going to do is to multiply the PDE by
a smooth test function and integrate by parts. And since phi is very smooth,
we're going to be able to move the derivatives
from the U into the phis. So essentially what
the weak solution needs to satisfy is the
equation that I wrote down on the slide, for every smooth, let's say compact supported phi such that it has divergence equal to zero. So this is a weaker notion
of a strong solution, a strong solution meaning
a point wise solution. Every point wise, every
strong solution is weak, but not every weak solution is strong. So mentally, what is happening here is that we are instead of
checking kind of the equation at every single point, we
are in some sense averaging the equation among all
possible sort of perturbations. And perturbations here means integrating against all possible suitably smooth test functions, test functions phi, okay? So this is what we're going to be defining as a weak solution. And I'm also going to be talking about a Leray-Hopf weak solution,
which is a particular type of weak solution that on top
of being a weak solution, satisfies the energy inequality. So the norm of U or the energy of U is bounded in this way by the energy or by the other norm of the gradient of U. So the fluid is allowed to lose energy, but it can never gain any of
it sort of spontaneously, okay? So I'm going to talk about
the Leray-Hopf solutions, the Leray-Hopf weak solutions,
which are weak solutions that satisfy this kind of
inequality for all time. So why so? Why are these things important? So Leray-Hopf solutions, the term was coined by Leray and Hopf. So Leray proved that in the 30s even before the theory of distributions was developed, that if you start with a
Leray-Hopf weak solution, then these solutions are
going to exist globally in the context of 3D Navier-Stokes. So if the initial data is
a Leray-Hopf weak solution, those solutions will exist globally. So then Hopf extended the proof of Leray to bounded domains. Okay, so far so good. So these solutions are
going to exist globally, but what we don't know is that
even if they exist globally, they may develop finite time singularities because the definition is weak enough that it could allow for the solutions to develop singularities. So whether, if we, for example,
if we were able to prove that Leray-Hopf weak
solutions are actually strong, then we're done because then they're going
to be global in time. But so far, that's not known. Okay, so I mentioned Ladyzhenskaya before. So this is a picture of Olga Ladyzhenskaya who grew up in the Soviet Union, and in '58-'59, she was able to prove the following sort of foundational
result that essentially showed global existence and uniqueness to the incompressible
Navier-Stokes equations in dimension two. So in dimension two, and use techniques that are now known as Ladyzhenskaya's inequalities that essentially allow you to control ordered terms in two dimensions and the exponents are good enough and the proof goes through. In 3D, the exponents
of these sort of norms that one needs to put in
order to do this control are not good enough. And then the proof sort
of breaks down for 3D in the sense that the techniques that work in the 2D case
do not work in 3D anymore. And this is why the 3D problem is still an open question in this context. So she was able to prove the case of 2D. So for 2D, we know everything and we know that we have global solutions for Navier-Stokes. Okay, how about partial regularity? So can we understand, let's
say, assume that things go wrong and let's try to do some analysis about how bad is the set of solutions, how bad is the set where
the solutions go wrong and develop singularities. So this is a problem that
was studied in the 70s and then into the 80s. First by Scheffer who
proved that if you look at the set where singularities
are present, then this set needs to have a Hausdorff dimension smaller or equal than two. And this was later improved by Caffarelli, Kohn and Nirenberg that the proof, that the set of possible singularities in again, in kind of space time has one dimensional
parabolic Hausdorff measure equal to zero. Okay, so simplifying sort
of the language a lot, we should expect the problematic points to be just points, okay? So we're not going to expect
things to go very wrong along the curve, for example. So the set of of things
going wrong is fairly small. And this somehow prompted, or at least the community,
I mean, I wasn't there to check it, but the community in the 90s was thinking more along the
lines of global existence with respect to like these two scenarios that Scheffer now proposed. I would say that the majority
of the community believed that the true answer was global existence. And it was just simply hard or technical to prove it, but the sort of the overall
belief was in the direction of global existence. An important object in
all of these business is what is known as the vorticity. So the vorticity omega is the curl of U, and in 2D, this is the component
in the third direction. So it's a scalar, and
in 3D, it's a vector. Now studying the vorticity is interesting because one can transform
the equations into something slightly easier to understand, and in particular the
pressure is going to drop from the equation. So we are not going to need to say anything about the pressure when looking at the
equation in vorticity form. So what's the difference
between the left and the right? Besides that the left is in
2D and the right is in 3D? So the point is that if we look at what is happening on the left, we see that vorticity is
transported by the velocity U and since this is a transport equation, the vorticity is not going to grow. So that's good because
we know that we are going to have some control on the vorticity, whereas in 3D, this is not guaranteed. And then because of the stretching term that appears on the right hand side, the vorticity, a priori could be amplified and in principle it could
become infinite in finite time. So that's, let's say, a
highly summarized version of why things are nice in 2D versus why things may not be so nice in 3D. And in fact, one can
obtain initial conditions for which at least for some time, there is some amplification
of the vorticity. So there is no guarantee or no need to expect that
the vorticity is going to behave a priori nicely. Maybe it does, but we don't know, okay? Whereas in the left, the
vorticity is going to be, is going to be transported, So yet another example of why these kind of equations are hard, and this is something
that people have managed to use in other contexts
for other equations, which is somehow some conservation law or some monotonicity quantity that if I know a prioria,
they have control, that they have good
control for all time of it, then I can say something
about the solution. So the canonical functional and the canonical, let's say quantity to use in this case is
the energy of the system. But the energy of the
system is super critical. And if one looks at
the energy conservation and the kind of gain that one obtains by looking at the energy
conservation, this is not enough. And in particular, we
cannot infer too much just from energy conservation as to what it means for the solution to develop a finite
time singularity or not. In particular, this means that if we want to give any sort of proof
of global existence, we need to use some deeper
structural properties of the nonlinearity. It's not just that there
is conservation of energy or even that the nonlinearity is quadratic or it is of the form something or the function times the gradient. And I will present more examples where this is even more evident. So energy conservation doesn't help enough and therefore we are at a loss and we are kind of back to square one whether there is global
existence or blow up. And chronologically, this is
kind of the type of things that people were trying in the
early days of the equation. So what do we know up until now? We know that if we start
with weak solutions, they're going to be existing for all time. We also know that if we
start with smooth solutions, they're going to exist
at least for short time. And if anything is to
develop a singularity, it's going to be difficult. It's going to be the
singularities are going to be very sparse in space time. And it's conceivable that
finding these candidates is going to be elusive and it's going to be difficult
to cook up a scenario where things go wrong. So it's kind of sort of
inviting to point out that the right direction
should be global existence. But who knows? And again, this is kind
of maybe the point of view 20 or maybe 30 years ago. So what we don't know and
we still don't know yet is whether smooth solutions
exist for all time in three dimensions. Okay, this is sort of like what was known, let's say up when the problem was posed And let me talk now about
more modern developments and what has been going on over the last, let's say 25 years. And here, it's going to go
from regularity criteria to something called complex integration. And on the computational side, which has been quite productive, going from computational blow up to even AI discover singularities, okay, so again, let's try to go again in
the direction of trying to prove global existence. So again, we have this
in mind that if we start with a Leray-Hopf solution,
maybe we can prove that these solutions are
actually better than that and they're actually smooth. So if a Leray-Hopf solution is in this mixed space,
LPT, LQX with that condition between P and Q, then U is smooth, okay? So that's a strong theorem proved besides the endpoint
case by Brody, Seregin and Ladzyhenskaya, okay? The endpoint case, it's
much more challenging. It had to wait until the
work of Escauriaza, Seregin and Sverak in the year 2003 using much more complicated estimates like troublesome estimates and sort of parabolic estimates. Now, why is this useful? Can we say something
sort of in these lines if we have this sort of enhancement of regularity from Leray-Hopf
to smooth, it may not help us to sort of bootstrapping
this kind of thing because the argument is circular, but it may help us to derive
contradiction arguments as to if things go wrong,
how wrong can they be? Namely the argument could go assume that, that the solution blows up and then something is going to contradict this condition. In particular, one of the
most established criteria going by Beale, Kato and Majda says that if there is a
finite time singularity, then this integral in
time of the vorticity has to be equal to infinity. So if we ever want to find
a finite time singularity, and this is going to be
quite important later when the numerics kick in, then the vorticity needs to
blow up at the blow up time. And there is a more refined criterion by Constantin and Fefferman that where they say that
the direction of vorticity has to change quite rapidly in order for the solution to blow up. So out of these kind of ideas, we can develop better blow up criteria. There is now people started to push on what is sort of the largest
good space that I can find where I can find global solutions or maybe unique solutions. And one of the landmark
papers in this context is by Koch and Tataru and where they prove that if your initial
data is in BMO minus one, then the Navier-Stokes equations
have a unique global mild, but you know, then enter into
what mild means, solution. And BMO minus one is essentially sort of the best you can do up to
very, very small refinements and Bourgain and Pavlovic sort
of prove kind of the opposite that if you step out a little bit then the equations are imposed. So as I said, BMO minus one is
essentially a sharp criteria. Germain, Pavlovic and Staffilani proved that Koch-Tartaru
solutions are real analytic for positive T. So in a nutshell, if
we are at BMO minus one or below, solutions are good, and if we are above it, we don't know, but this is sort of our
refinement on how far can we go in this space. Okay, let's go now to the computational, the computational stuff. So with the advent of
computers in the 90s, it's very tempting to try to say, well maybe I can try to find some candidate
computationally, what happens? And so there are many, there have been many candidates in history where there were many claims and then the computations were refined. This is an example where in '93, Kerr did a very detailed for
his time computational study where he started with
anti-parallel vortex tubes and the numerical studies suggested a finite time
singularity at some time. And then many years later, Hou and Li repeated his calculation with better computers because time had passed, higher resolution and found no singularity. So essentially, the quantities
that Kerr was monitoring went up, up, up, up, suggested sort of like
a finite time blow up. But in reality if you were able to push the solution a bit
more, then you could see that they sort of went down and depleted and there was no singularity at all. There are other examples of
these anti-parallel vortex tubes or variations thereof, for example, by Brenner, Hormoz and Pumir and where they sort of devise sort of a more complicated mechanism involving like a cascade of these kind of sheets folding and kind of circling at
very different scales that could potentially lead
to finite time blow up. Okay, so the equations are fighting back and finding candidates is tough, okay? Even from a computational point of view with the power of computers. So again, the computational
challenge is okay, you have the advantage of
having maybe a supercomputer where you can launch
many of these experiments and you can try many these
conditions and see what happens. So there are things that are going to be sort of very delicate in this context. The first one is that if you're tracking and if you're trying to find a singularity for which some things
go wrong, in particular, if some things are meant to be infinity, then as you approach that, even in the best case, you're going to lose resolution, the
errors will take over and then your solution is
going to be and the result and potentially give you
maybe false indications as to what you're looking for. One way to potentially overcome this is to use some form of
numerical viscosity. There are many different
tricks in this regard, but if you put some viscosity
then like artificially, then maybe you may be misled by that and maybe you're not
really simulating like the honest equation and
you're getting sort of a different outcome than what
the equation should give. And if you ever expect to use numerics to prove global regularity,
then this is not going to happen because it's going to be difficult to span all the set of initial data. And even you can sort of bounce
things up to a certain time, there's no guarantee that at
a later time things are going to get any better. So some kind of evolution of this paradigm got into computer assisted proofs where one can overcome these
sort of numerical phenomena and numerical errors by
using rigorous error bounds. And this is kind of a technique that has been picked
up over the last years. So what's a computer assisted
proof in this context? It's more or less the
following sort of set up. Suppose that my numerical method gives me an approximate solution that
has the behavior that I want and what I want to prove is to upgrade that numerical candidate by
means of a fixed point theorem to prove that the true solution exists close to the approximation. So that's kind of the game
that I'm going to play. And in order to do so, I'm going to need to quantify potentially many constants that appear in my problem. And in order to prove like rigorous bounds on those constants, I will
propagate all the errors done by the computer using interval arithmetic instead of floating point arithmetic. So this is a technique that was first developed in
the 80s, Lanford, for example, was one of the ones that did it for the Feigenbaum conjectures. And in fluids, due to,
again, better hardware, better software, better theory. It hasn't been until the
last sort of 10 years or so or 15 years where people
had transitioned from mostly the study of finite
dimensional dynamical systems to more into like the PDE world and the study of like infinite dimensional
problems in a way. So this is kind of close to my heart. This is the type of
mathematics that I was trained and now I'm very, very happy
to see that it has been picked up and has been quite powerful in the last 10 years or so. Okay, so still, we are still stubborn and we think that there
is global regularity for this equation. So Tao wrote a post in 2007 explaining why the problem is hard. So as I said before, the
energy is super critical. So if you try to understand and to use energy
conservation to say something, you're not going to be able to do that. If you try to use another quantity, then there's no other quantity
known that can help you in that regard, at least up to now. So either you find a new
control critical quantity like a new Leray-Hopf function or some kind of conservation law which hasn't happened
before, hasn't happened yet. Or you need to really
understand the structure beyond sort of the scaling analysis or beyond like linear versus nonlinear or linear versus quadratic kind of thing. Any generic argument is not going to work. So Tao proved global regularity. For example, for
logarithmically super critical Navier-Stokes equation where
you don't put the Laplacian, you put a little bit
more than the Laplacian like the Laplacian to the five four. So even more dissipation
than what you have for Navier-Stokes. And again, if you try
to use soft techniques, this is really not going to work. If you use soft techniques
of a slightly different form, they're also not going to work. So also Tao now considered some kind of average
Navier-Stokes equation that had good properties
like energy identity, Sobolev bounds and right symmetries and for which he could prove
blow up in finite time. How did he do that? This is going to be relevant later. He sort of created some kind, he call it a von Neumann machine because it was sort of
understood in the context of finite automata, but it's essentially some kind of self-replicating structure that can transfer energy from small scales to large scales, sorry, the way around, from large scales to small scales. And what this shows is that for this, you cannot really
distinguish Navier-Stokes from sort of a model like this, just from soft properties. So if you ever try to to
do that, you really need to understand much better, the structure, the structure of the equation. Okay, now let's look at something that has also been interesting, which is something called
the Onsager conjecture. So Onsager conjecture and a new method called convex integration. So this is in the context of
very low regularity solutions to Euler, 3D Euler or 3D Navier-Stokes. So Onsager conjecture is the following, you take a weak solution that has called the regularity
alpha greater than 1/3, then it will conserve energy. And 1/3 is important because that's kind of the threshold where you can do integration
by parts in a let's say, proper way versus where you cannot. Now if alpha is smaller
than 1/3, you can do things that are very, very strange
like solutions to 3D Euler that are meant to conserve energy. They could dissipate energy, okay? And the threshold 1/3 is important for many reasons. So the first result was the
legitimate result in the 90s where you can actually prove
that under that condition, like all the integration
byproducts are justified and therefore you get
conservation of energy. And in order to solve
the flexibility part, this really spanned a
series of many papers and many developments starting
from the work of De Lellis and Szekelyhidi who sort of developed something called convex integration that was stemming from the
work of Nash and of Gromov and sort of ported into the
context of fluid dynamics. So this led to sort of
improvements on this alpha where first the flexibility
was proved for very small alpha and then gradually improved
all the way up to the work of Phil Isett who completed the program and in 2018 proved Onsager's conjecture. There is another follow
up paper by Buckmaster, De Lellis, Szekelyhili and Vicol where they extended this proof to sort of construct solutions that could do sort of wild things and in fact satisfy any
prescribed energy profile. So that was Euler. What about Navier-Stokes? In the context of Navier-Stokes,
Buckmaster and Vicol proved that if you have weak solutions
like rough weak solutions, you have non uniqueness and even more so you can
match the energy profile to do whatever you want. And they sort of, again, building up on this
convex integration scheme, they develop something called
intermittent Beltrami waves that sort of was the building block to allow to overcome the dissipation. Now this could potentially
answer Ladyzhenskaya's question, but these solutions are too rough, so these solutions are too
rough to be Leray-Hopf. So this doesn't say anything in the context of Leray-Hopf. Okay, let's move on to other type of computational blow up. Now we are in 2014. So there have been like many
attempts throughout the years on sort of trying to find
out potential candidates of the Euler and Navier-Stokes solutions for which there could be
a finite time singularity. However, in 2014, Luo and Tom Hou did a very good computation and a very compelling
argument where they took 3D Euler in the context of a cylinder. So if you take like a glass
and you have like walls and the fluid is confined to be inside, forget about the lid, then numerically, they could observe and assume that the solution
is actually symmetric, massive growth of the
vorticity on the plane Z is equal to zero, R is equal to one, namely on the boundary. And they conjecture that
based on their simulations and the vorticity would
blow up at a certain rate and the numerics look plausible. Now what what this was
hinting is like let's take problems with boundary and let's look at what
happens on the boundary. And the boundary in fact helps to find finite time blow up. This is a picture taken from Quanta where you essentially see
sort of the Luo-Hou scenario and how like the flow is
spinning one way at the top, spinning the opposite at the bottom and this creates secondary
recurrence that eventually lead to finite time blow up
like on this circle, R is equal to one, Z is equal to zero. Okay, how about the sort of
the Ladyzhenskaya problem? So in 2022, Albritton,
Brue and Colombo proved that there is non-uniqueness for Leray-Hopf solutions
for3D Navier-Stokes, but with a caveat that you need to put an external
forcing on the equations and that external forcing is
tailored to the type of data that they pick related to
some prior construction of Vishik in 2D that was
later expanded to 3D. So these ideas, they all come or they are all heavily
influenced by the work of Jia and Scerak that sort of
had outlined the program saying that all you need to do is to find a linearly unstable
self similar solution and then you can undergo a bifurcation and have non uniqueness of
these Leray-Hopf solutions. So using this type of program and improving on it, then
Albritton, Brue and Colombo were able to prove non
uniqueness with an external force and there has been a lot
of activity in this sort of direction, especially
in the last four years, sort of culminating with an
announcement in September 2025 by Hou, Wang and Yang where they claimed that the unforced Leray-Hopf solutions are non-unique using the program
outlined by Jia and Sverak and also like numerics based
on the work of Jia and Sverak and involving a computer assisted proof. The computer assisted
proof is still ongoing the verification, but nonetheless, this is
the announcement out there about six months ago. There is also further work
by Colculescu and Palasek proving sort of non
uniqueness in this space, BMO minus one and even very recent work by Albritton, Guillod, Korobkov and Ren looking at the problem in 2D. Okay, how about blow up? So I talked before about
the Luo-Hou scenario in the interior of the cylinder. So that was a numerical
calculation in 2014. So it it had to happen 10 years until Chen and Hou in a series of papers posted in 2023 proved actually that there
is a finite time blow up for the incompressible 3D Euler equations in the context of the
interior of a cylinder. So they could prove that starting from smooth initial data with finite energy in
a cylindrical domain, the 3D Euler equation develops
a finite time singularity, which is of nearly of similar type. And in order to do that, they went through a
computer assisted proof constructing an approximate
self similar profile, proving some form of
stability in inequalities and then verifying everything
through interval arithmetic and guaranteeing all
the quantitative bounds that were present in the problems. So does this solve anything
related to the Clay problem or even to the Euler equation? Not really, the boundary, it
plays a massive role here. The boundary really stabilizes the singularity and this
result does not address the Navier-Stokes case and it does not address
even the Euler case in the context of the full space. So working on one domain or another really makes a difference here in the context of a proof. It's also if you think about it, if you take a cylinder and you look at the
particle on the boundary, then the particle on the
boundary can essentially go in one direction or in two directions, in one if you're symmetric, but it cannot cross. So then it can only go
up or along the boundary. And then this constraint in the movement of the particles allow you to pin down much better the scenario and to sort of fabricate
an initial condition that can lead to finite time singularity. Okay, so Hou has been working
on more numerical scenarios and presenting them in a series of papers, one suggesting blow up
for 3D Navier-Stokes in some kind of tornado style singularity where he claimed that the vorticity was amplified
by 10 to the seven, and another one which
had an interesting idea, which is using the
dimension as a parameter. So he was able to come up with an equation where the dimension is a free parameter and it's something that
one is allowed to pick and then he numerically
obtained some candidate that would be the solution to Navier-Stokes in dimension 3.1888. So this is the solution of some nonlinear eigenvalue
problem that turns out to have that solution. So this is not Navier-Stokes, it's an interesting exercise suggesting that more likely there is one dimension that is one sort of cancellation that you need to obtain via some parameter or some form of additional structure. In this case, he used the dimension. This also suggests that
the blow up is probably quite unstable and in order to stabilize it, you can use this kind of artificial parameter,
which in this case was taken as the dimension. So let's fast forward and let's look at neural networks and sort of AI in this context. So a neural network is sort of a nice pictorial representation of a function that is obtained by
composing on a fine map with some non-linear activation
function, for example, like the hyperbolic tangent. So at every layer at, you
compose these two things, the fine map that has some free parameters and the nonlinear activation function. And at the end of the
day, you're representing your favorite function using an extremely nonlinear representation. Why is this useful? Well, these nonlinear representations seem to require far fewer
parameters than let's say, other representations such
as linear for approximation and in particular for discovery. So the way one solves
PDE using this paradigm is to try to minimize a loss
function over these sets of parameters, namely the weights and the biases coming from the fine maps that appear on every sort
of little arrow joining every two neurons. So there is one method
which is known as PINNs or physics informed neural
networks that essentially you train, you sort of
minimize these loss functions over this set of parameters until the PDE residual or maybe the derivatives
of the PDE residual or perhaps other terms are small enough. So there is no mesh here,
no discretization, no data and you use the equation to guide you through the set of parameters. Now empirically, what it seems to happen
is that for discovery, this representation
seems to work very well and in fact in a series of work with Wang, Lai, Buckmaster, Cao0Labora, in a bigger collaboration
with Google DeepMind, we were able to use this kind of paradigm and variations thereof to discover self-similar blow up profiles that were unstable for
3D axisymmetric Euler, something called the CCF equation and something called the incompressible porous media equations, which hadn't been observed
before in many cases, also with quite high precision in terms of like the
residual being satisfied up to a very, very low number. Now does this solve the Millennium problem or even hint to anything in that matter? No, because these equations
are not Navier-Stokes, okay? So these equations are related equations that share some structure with
fluid equations like Euler or Navier-Stokes, but
they're not Navier-Stokes. So maybe one can learn something from this paradigm. Let's look more into
self-similar singularities. So self-similar singularities
are the kind of solutions that we found that could potentially lead or that lead to finite time blow up. Okay, why, let's go back
in time now 25 years. So this is a quote from Luis
Caffarelli in the context of lectures on the Millennium problems at UT 25 years ago. And he said, if I were
to find singularities for Navier-Stokes, a traditional way of finding them would be to find self similar solutions. However, you're not going to succeed if you do it like straight away because it has been proved
by Necas, Ruzieka and Sverak this is not possible. So if you want to find a
singularity for Navier-Stokes, then what you need to find is
first a singularity for Euler so that the self similarity
scales with the Eulerian scaling and then show that the viscosity is a lower order there. And he claimed that this
was the only possibility that he saw back then in constructing singularities for Navier-Stokes. Okay, so the path that
Caffarelli was seeing back then was to understand first the
finite time singularities for Euler and then use
that as building block to construct finite time
singularities for Navier-Stokes. So what is a self similar solution? It's kind of the following. So take our solution in XT coordinates on the left and let time evolve up to the
singularity time so we can see that slowly, things are
going to be developing some kind of gradient or some kind of function is going to go to infinity. Now, if I were to zoom
in at the right scale relative to time, and
if I rescale properly, then if I have a self similar solution, then all my profiles look
like the ones on the right. And in fact, converge to some fixed point in these new rescaled coordinates, C, tau. So the point is that, I mean this is great because things on the left
are going to become infinite, whereas things on the right
are going to become fixed point and they're not going to move too much and they're going to
be much more tractable, much more amenable to be found. So if we postulate that our solution little U has this structure in terms
of capital U with beta and gamma to be determined,
then maybe it is easier to catch this capital U. Okay, so how would one go from say, a self similar solution
to a singularity proof? This is sort of the program. Well step one, find such a
approximate self similar solution you not even numerically it should be, it should be good enough. So let's say you have an approximately numerically self similar solution
up to very high precision. Now what you can do is to linearize around that profile, show good
spectral properties, some form of stability in some sense and upgrade those properties
to nonlinear properties. Then once you do that and once you track all
your estimates using a computer assisted proof
methods, then you can sort of go back to XT and
recover the blowup in XT. Several caveats, as I pointed before, not every exponent is admissible in the context of Navier-Stokes by proof, by the people that I mentioned before. And there is a very recent paper by Constantin, Ignatova and Vicol where they proved bounds on the exponent for Eulers. So they prove that in general, gamma needs to be greater or equal than 2/5 and in the axisymmetric
case, gamma needs to be greater or equal than than 1/2. And this exponent is relevant because it has to do with
the Navier-Stokes scaling. Okay, this is another
strategy sort of again, trying to go in the direction
of finite time singularity. So Elgindi was able to relax the problem and starting from non smooth
but not terribly rough data. So C1 alpha data, he was able
to prove finite time blow up for 3D Euler in the whole space without any boundary, but with the caveat that the initial data is not
as smooth as we would like and this was further improved by Elgindi, Ghoul and Massmoudi proving the stability of those profiles. So that was a great idea, that was really a breakthrough and it
influenced a lot further works by other people, including other papers by Elgindi-Pasqualotto and Cordoba, Martinez, Zoroa and Zheng using some sort of like
multiscale approach to constructing these singularities. So the question here is, can one go from this C1 alpha solution and sort of improve them a bit so that one can get like C
infinity regularity everywhere. So that could be
potentially another strategy into constructing, let's
say finite time blow up from structures kind
of similar to this one. Okay, so if I were to
summarize now how things stand, then we can see the gold
line is sort of what we knew before the Clay problem was written down and sort of below the golden
line is what we know now. There are still many open questions that we don't know
despite knowing a lot more than 25 years ago. And in particular we still
don't know if smooth flow may break down or not. So what's going to
happen, what's the future? Well, if we were try to go in the global existence direction, then we need to come up with something beyond energy methods and something that uses
heavily the structure of the Navier-Stokes equation. We could go in understanding
finite time blow up in related systems either
by relaxing the conditions or either by changing a bit the equation. If we were to try to go
through Leray-Hopf solutions, this is unlikely to work as is. We may need to develop new solutions and sort of new sort of
conditions of solutions to be able to be compatible here. Nobody knows how the
impact of AI is going to, is going to be in this, well,
in mathematics in general, but in this context in concretely and computer assisted proofs seem to start playing a prominent
role in this sort of approach and these kind of techniques. So the million dollar
question still stands. And do we have smooth initial data that can produce a finite time singularity or will we always have smooth solutions? So after Euler, Navier,
Leray and Ladyzhenskaya and 200 plus years of the
greatest mathematical minds, nobody knows, a million dollar awaits. Thank you. (audience applauding)