Thank you very much. Thanks for having me. It's a pleasure to be back here at the EPFL. It's a place I like a lot and uh to be part of these uh special day. Um my talk will be very different from the previous one. It will be a bit a bit more uh um less technical, I would say, and I hope it's not a problem um because I did not know exactly which audience I will have in front of me. So, I'm going to talk to you about statistics and AI about 3 4 years ago, the group of my the work of my research group has shifted considerably. Uh I live in the in a very AI-centric place. And one of the good thing about being in Switzerland is that when I land off the plane and arrive in Zurich, not everybody was talking about AI. But if you land in San Francisco, that's all you hear about. You know, everybody talks about AI non-stop. And so um I felt I'm going to have to bring you some uh air from San Francisco. So, we're going to talk about AI quite a bit. Um but it also relates to statistics. And in fact, I would argue that AI is a fundamentally uh a statistical discipline. And so, it is my view that uh statisticians can contribute enormously to this field. I'll give you some examples of what statisticians can do, but of course there are many others. And so, in our lab, we do a lot of different things. So, you'll see just a few of the things we've done. And I hope they'll pick up your interest. So, um what we're going to do is we uh going to have a talk in basically two parts. Uh we're going to say, "What can I do when you give me a big model? And what am I supposed to do with the outputs when they have uncertainty?" And the second is uh well, you know, can we actually improve the the training of big AI models themselves? So, this is what I will talk about. So, uh we're going to talk about uh using AI in a what I hope is a safe manner. And I don't want to be philosophical in this lecture. So, basically the way I structure this lecture is through a series of vignettes that will show you a little bit how statistical thinking can take you a long way. So, we're going to talk about uh drug discovery and also about trying to kind of assess the accuracy of LLMs first. So, let's talk about drug discovery first. Um Uh this is uh announcement by DeepMind. So, DeepMind has released a library of molecules of compounds that you could possibly synthesize. These are proteins that actually do not exist in the wild that you do have to synthesize for the first time. And so, of course, it's very interesting to have this library because, you know, it suggests things that we could actually potentially synthesize to kind of fight diseases. And so, um uh the cost of bringing drugs to market uh is uh both tak- time-consuming and expensive. And so, you see some uh some graph that says, you know, it's very hard for pharmaceutical companies to design new drugs and bring them to market. Takes a lot of time and effort. And so, of course, AI has a promise of speeding that process. And so, one of the reason this cost is very uh high both time-wise and in terms of Swiss francs is that um so, you know, I have a disease that I want to that I'm interested in. I have some candidate drugs. And then I'm going to try to go in the lab and try to see whether these drugs have something to do with my disease. The thing that we are doing is that we're interested in whether a certain compound, a certain candidate drug that perhaps has never been synthesized will actually have a high affinity for target molecule. All right. And to do that we're going to go through physical screening and we're going to measure the affinity of a possible compound for a target. And if this affinity is high, if it binds, or if it has high affinity, um you know, we're going to short list it and maybe this is we're going to go under go under go clinical trials. All right, and of course the step in the middle, uh which you see and I Okay, this guy is very expensive. And of course now what we would like to do is to replace this with virtual screening. So now we have tools like AlphaFold, and neural nets, and transformers, and so on. And and language models for proteins and all of that. Wouldn't it be great to substitute physical experiments with virtual experiments where I could just call one of these AI systems, get a predicted score for affinity, and then skip this expensive part, and go directly to um to market or trial at least. And so that's a promise of uh of um of uh AI. And uh so we would like to get some predictions, you know, of course the gold standard is to get them in the lab, but you know, can I get them virtually? And so if you look at, you know, fairly serious publications, Nature, and and all of that, you know, like yes, it's been a while that people are at this, and we're not making so much progress yet. Um here's an editorial from Nature, AI's potential to accelerate drug discovery needs a reality check. And this is because of course the output of AIs are very unreliable. AlphaFold works quite well on molecules you know well, and less well on molecules you know less well. And so we since we're interested in in finding out molecules about which we know less, you know, we need to do be a little bit of work. So, the problem I'm going to pose in this first half is all right. So I have a bunch of candidate drugs and as you'll see at the end of this first half I'll show you a paper with we we put online with Genentech. So it's the last part of this presentation is joint with Genentech where you know, we screen really 500,000 never synthesized compounds and what Genentech wanted to know is whether which of these ones would have a high affinity for target that they cared about. All right, that's the question they they care about and so all right. So we want to know which one are sufficiently active. So let's kind of try to kind of explain what this mean mathematically. Mathematically is I'm going to assume that I have a pre-trained model and we do have pre-trained model and alpha fold is a good example of a pre-trained model. A new hat that takes as input the compound you're interested in. So but for example, you should think about it as the sequence of amino acids of the drug. As other things you might want to put in X, you know, but you know, just if I give you the sequence of amino acids, you know, that's pretty much all you need. And Y is a response of interest is going to be the binding affinity of this compound for a target. All right, so it could be binary. So zero or one, it is or binds or it doesn't or you know, it could be a bit more subtle, you know, how well does it bind to the target? It can be a real number. This is typically things that you would measure in the lab after costly experiment. And so in blue we're going to have the drugs for which we have their affinity score because they've been measured in the lab and in red by and large most drugs have not been measured in the lab and so I don't know what their affinity is. So mathematically, what is it that we're trying to do? We're trying to we have some training data, those things that we have tested so far and so these are the screen drugs for which we have both a sequence of amino acid, the chemical structure of the compound, and its affinity for target. And we have a lot of test samples. In fact, the size of the test library largely exceeds um the size of the training library for which we do not have an affinity, but we'd like to know what it is. And what you could think about happening in drug discovery is that in drug discovery, people want to know which wise would exceed a certain threshold. Like I'm interested in those drugs that would exceed a threshold that I set ahead of time. A successful experiment would be if a drug achieves at least as a have affinities that is higher than a given threshold. That threshold can be random. It can be for this class of drug, it has to be at least better than anything I have so far. Or it has to be in the top 5% of what I've seen so far. All right, it can be random. But &gt;&gt; [clears throat] &gt;&gt; what we want is we want to be able to screen this library and find those molecules that when we're going to test in the lab, we're going to see something above threshold. And this is something that I am not setting. This is something that the lab director uh will set. That what makes a drug interesting. Okay. So So, all right. So the question that you might ask at the beginning of a process like this is like a lot of things. Like people ask us a lot of things, literally. So, my AI model told me to synthesize these 30 new drugs because the AI thinks that they are really potent drugs. Meaning they have going to have a high affinity. How many of will be uh potent? I want to find at least 30 effective drugs. How many uh should I synthesize in my lab? You know, many questions like this, you know, you have a this huge library, you don't know their outcomes, and you want to make predictions about what you'll see when you test a selected set of drugs. So, the question we can answer all questions, but the one we going to focus on and it's because it has connection with the statistical literature, the one we'll focus on is how many drugs can I synthesize until I make 20% mistakes. That is your okay, you know, lab is okay to set aside to lose money on experiments that do not pan out, but you want to control the amount of time, human resources, and capital you spend on things that doesn't work. Right? So, we're going to say how many drugs can I synthesize? We're going to ask until I make 20 mistakes. So, we're going to examine this question. Okay, so, you know, my AI system is very happy to predict affinities. And the question is, well, should I trust them? Like that's a question, right? And so, maybe some of these predictions are accurate, some are not. I don't know, right? So, that's a problem. And when I need to kind of get reliable answers, I want to be able to give a list of drugs to a lab manager and say, "Look, I mean, if you test these 100 drugs, you're going to make at least 50 discoveries." I need to be right when I say things like that. You know, so, if they make zero, we have a big problem. So, um this is a a bit of challenge because, you know, we're far from regression models, we're going to use enormous neural networks and transformer architecture to predict these affinities. You know, we're far from everything we know from classical statistics. We have no model and we're going to see that we also need to account for distribution shift in a big way. So, um so, So is another thing that you have to deal with when you deal with problem and I I know some people are working in causal inference. That's not unlike what you see in causal inference. The class of drugs for which you have their label, their Y's, their affinity, and the class of drugs for which you do not, they may not be the same. Right? Because the class of drugs for which you have their label, they look interesting in the first place. So they might be different. They might have a different distribution, so to speak, than the the drugs that you have in your test set. In particular, it's kind of very interesting that in a lot of things that we're working on in in in in real life, um, is that you have what we call the distribution shift between the train the test drugs and your training drugs. And that distribution shift is likelihood ratio between the test and the training set only depends on X. It only depends on the chemical structure of the drug, not on Y given X, because Y given X is physics. Physics could not care less whether you're in the training or the test set. Right? The way a protein folds or binds to another molecule doesn't matter whether you're in training set. It's just physics. So here we have sort of a distribution shift, which is entirely driven by the covariate. So All right. So this is not unlike what a lot of people do, you know? I mean, I could argue that the students that were admitted at EPFL are not like every student in in Switzerland. You know, they're a bit special. If I may say so. Okay. So what we're going to do is we're going to try to answer all these challenging questions by leveraging tools from uh, new tools under the name of conformal prediction and then perhaps more classical ideas from statistics, but I think the combination of the two is really interesting. So, um, I'm not going to tell you much about conformal prediction, but it's a very important field of research uh, that has been exploding in the last eight nine years. You see literally thousands of submissions to major machine machine learning conferences with conformal prediction. I'm just not going to say what it is exactly. It's a wonderful field that was pioneered by Vladimir Vovk. And what it does, it says that if I give you a prediction model then you have a way to turn this into um a prediction range with prescribed values. So what conformal prediction does, it says I have a model that makes a point prediction. So for example, it predicts 14.5. And what the method does, it will be able to take these predictions and transform this prediction into a range of plausible values for the label Y with a remarkable property that is that the chance that the label belongs to the prediction set is at least 95%. So I'm not going to discuss how this is done. This is not very difficult. But now what we should know is that we have tools that can make sort of calibrated predictions in the sense that it can issue ranges of plausible values with a prescribed probability of success. All right? And so that holds no matter the prediction model. All right? So we're going to use this insight um uh to to well, this is kind of conformal. And um we're going to play with that idea. So what you should think you should do think about is okay. So I have my drugs and I don't know their affinity. So now I'm going to make this sort of calibrated predictions. And so um you know, I have M drugs that I need to test and each time I have a cutoff value which is C. Let's say it's the same for all drugs. It doesn't have to be. And I'm going to look at um these prediction intervals. And remember that marginally, whatever you see in a orange interval has a 95% chance of containing the true label. So, what you would say is that you'd say, "Okay, so this is I don't need any uncertain I mean, I can do uncertainty quantification. I don't need models. So, all of this good." And so, what you might want to do is you say, "Well, Emmanuel, maybe you should send to the lab these two drugs." Because, you know, you're very sure that they're above their cutoff. Okay? And uh so, maybe I should then send to the lab. And when you do something like that, um you commit a crime. Like, there is a selection problem. That is, the drug whose intervals is short of short and high may not be representative either of other drugs. So, what we say in statistics is what holds marginally may not hold over the selected. There's a selection bias. And so, this is what you're going to see on the on the next picture, which is that, you know, the people have been tempted to use conformal prediction for drug discovery. But, what you see is, you know, you have the the effectiveness of the drug. So, you would like to say, "Okay, I Emmanuel have a budget for the drugs that the fraction of experiment I can waste." And here's this budget on the right on this plot is very low. It's like, I want to waste 1%, 2%, 10%. And what you see you're wasting really when you apply this strategy is 85%. Most of what you do is actually wrong. So, you're wasting an enormous amount of your budget to follow false leads. And this has to do with the fact that the intervals or the drugs for which you predict something high may not be representative of the pool of drugs. So, marginal, you know, marginal guarantees are not the same as guarantees after selection. Now, it's maybe if you're not a statistician, you may have heard this about, you know, like the winner's curse. You know, that's sort of an instance of the winner's curse. Okay. This fact that when I select interesting things and when I go out in the wild and things don't reproduce after selection has been a problem for the sciences and it's one of the reason that we have a a crisis of reproducibility and which has inspired a whole field of research that goes under the name of selective inference. Okay, so so we're going to try to kind of do a bit more. And so, what we're going to do is we're going to construct scores on the training data and on the test data. And the scores are going to be VIs and VI here is a difference between the affinity and the predicted affinity. All right, so it's sort of the residual, but it's a signed residual between the prediction of your model and what you measure in the lab. For the test molecules, I don't have their affinity. So, instead of their predicted af- All right, okay. All right, so so we have these residuals which are the difference between the what you have observed. And when I cannot observe, I'm going to put the threshold. Okay. And then for each test drug, I'm going to compute, you know, it's not a p-value, but Okay, I'm going to compute the rank that the test drug will have if it's true measured activity were CN + J among the things that I have in my library. So, if I have if VN + J hat is very small, then it has only very few VI smaller than this, and so it's going to receive a small score. It's going to receive a PJ is going to be small. So, if the rank of a test drug is very small, it's going to get a small P value. It's going to get a small PJ. Of course, this is all random. And so, I'm just going to look at the test the rank of a test molecule among the ones that I measured if um if for the unknown test affinity of this test drug, I put the threshold. And so, you have kind of a it's not a trivial result. Now, this statistics, these P's, they are absolutely not independent of each other uh because they all use the calibration set. So, they're very far from independent, yet it turns out that this this is very useful uh confidence measure because the chance that we the rank is low, like this value PJ is lesser than alpha, if you indeed if you're not interested interesting is less than alpha. So, it's calibrated in the right way. And so, what it says is that we're going to try to get those molecules that have small values of of P. And why is it that if small if P is small, it means that V hat is small. So, it means that CN + J - mu hat is small, which means that YN + J is likely large and above its threshold. If mu hat is a decent estimate of Y. Okay. So, so we want to select those molecules that have a small rank or small values of P's, and which molecules are we going to select? This is where the thing is very surprising because for statisticians in the room, we're not testing parametric models. There's no parameters in this talk, none of any kind. We're just trying to see whether an a random outcome will be above a threshold or not. And what we're going to do is we're going to say, well, now we're going to pull out a procedure from the statistics literature, which is known as the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, which is I think one of the most beautiful thing in that happened to the field in the last 35 years. We're going to find a data dependent threshold that will tell us what to send to the lab. So, I'm now going to explain what this procedure does. It finds a a a threshold adaptively from the data, and all the drugs that have a P less than this threshold will be sent to the lab. And the remarkable result is this result with Ying is say that if I apply this procedure, then I control the hit rate. So, if I apply this procedure, then in expectation, the number of the expected ratio of the non non number of molecules I sent to the lab over the number of molecules I sent to the lab is less than what you said. So, if you want to use 20% of your budget with no more than you will waste on average no more than 20%. If you want to waste no more than 50%, you waste no more than So, it's actually precising very it's controlling the hit rate. It guarantees in expectation, if you think not about the miss rate, but more than about the hit rate, it guarantees in expectation a certain hit rate. And so, when you apply this in practice, so this is a a um a a a a real data set. So, it's now everything all the data experiments you'll see here are real. Uh when you put this in uh in the world, um you'll see that um you know, you put your FDR target on the Y axis. So, this is a fraction of experiments that you're willing to tolerate will end up in failure. In red, you see the outcome of our experiment. This is a curve. This is actually the fraction that do end up in failure. And so, you're hugging the 45° line. So, you have it's extremely precise. It's a very boring plot. To have a a a a line hugging the 45°. But, to me, it's the most beautiful thing. It says, "I can tell you ahead of time how many mistakes you'll make, even though I've no idea what the Y's are." Now, you have in blue the method that people would like it to work, but does not account for selection. And you can see that you have an enormous problem. You want 10% of errors, and you get, as we saw before, you know, something like 70%. So, you miss most you you miss a lot of stuff. Now, in practice, um you're going to have to be worried about something that we discussed before, which is um that you're going to have a distribution shift. Your test drugs and your training drugs are not the same. So, what you're going to do to address this problem is you're going to um try to find weights. So, you're going to You know, when you run these neural net stuff and these embeddings and you're going to represent your molecules through embeddings and so on, you're going to have some summary statistics from these drugs that you learn. I'm going to call them phi of X. And what are we going to try to do is we're going to try to find weights w i. And this is actually an idea that comes from the field of causal inference. We're going to try to find weights that are w i such that they're as close to uniform as possible, but when I measure the empirical this statistics over the training and test data, I get very little difference. So, so, we're going to try to find weights such that when I weigh my my my training sample and I take the just empirical average of the test sample, these statistics don't differ very much. So, some training points will be upweighted, some will be downweighted, but I'm going to try to find weights such that uh this this kind of representation that these neural networks are learning are well matched across training and test sets. Okay. All right, so we're going to do this. And then, all you do now, now that you have the weights, you know, what it means when you're going to calculate your rank, how exceptional you are, then uh some points in the training set and some points in the calibration set are going to receive um uh some point in the calibration set are going to be upweighted. So, you have a a sort of a weighted version of this measure that we that I introduced before. Now, if you did a very good job and, you know, you had an oracle that told you, "Emmanuel, I know exactly the likelihood ratio between training and test, why don't you use it?" This measure will still be perfectly calibrated. In practice, nobody's giving me this, so I do my best by this uh entropy matching, but um what you'll see is that when we apply this on a lot of uh data set that uh people in the field care about, you know, you see the same curve. So, this is uh a different experiment where we try to select proteins that are very stable, that they do not degrade very quickly. And so, again, you have your FDR target on the Y on the X axis, your realized FDR on the on the Y axis, and you're hugging the 45° line. And now, we have tremendous shift between the data you gave me for training and the data that you asked me to test. Okay? Um we see this again and again. This is to select a combination of gene perturbations with high cell viability and again, you know, you see the thing and and I don't know it's it's not an impressive picture. It's not like showing a video of a cat running in the snow and so on and so forth, etc. But for me to actually guess ahead of time the number of errors I will make is something I'm still surprised about. Okay. All right. So, uh we we use Genentech, so you have my logo at the top. Uh they got very interested in in this, so they talked to us. They say, "We would like to use this." And so, we run a prospective study. And that prospective study had, as I mentioned, 460,000 uh molecules. Of course, Genentech is interested in finding things that they don't already have. So, they subtract they extracted from these 460,000 things 15,000 that they wanted to scan. And so, we applied the method that you've seen. We had to estimate distribution shifts and do all of that. And Genentech asked us if we test these 100 molecules, how many what's our hit rate? And we looked at them and said, "If you test these 100 molecules, their hit hit rate is going to be low. It's going to be at most 19%." And so, we got an estimated false discovery rate 80% 80.3, which means that the number the fraction of hits should be around 20% a bit less, 19%. With an error bar which is a bit between 70 and 94.6. They were surprised by that. They said uh they had models internally. They said, "It should be 100% hits." Um and they made the experiments, so they tested these 100 and they got nine. And so, this nine molecules these are the one you're going to see here, so uh um these are there. I think they're going to be pursued from now on. And um what I wanted to show you is that the the kind of the myth rate if you look the false discovery rate if you just apply naive ideas um if you do not account for distribution shift and if you do the thing like what we think you know we we got very close to the the thing. So so this is technology or method that seem to be working well in the wild and uh And so um I think that's the end of uh my first part. Uh how do I might doing on time? I'm a bit short on time maybe. I just maybe I'll go quickly on this second one. So this is another thing that we did a bit earlier with uh two of my students John Cherian and Isaac Gibbs. Um And so this is about uh when you ask GPT for things, you know, how often is a shingles vaccine required? So you know, ChatGPT will be happy to oblige and write a paragraph. And um you know I interact with ChatGPT a lot and sometimes there's a lot of wrong stuff in it. And so it would be nice to have a system that would sort of weed out the false claims, try to keep as many claims as possible and tell me a sort of a confidence score Emmanuel like what is you know, you say you you you remove two claims. So here I would like uh you know, so here you would like maybe to remove this claim. It is currently recommended that individuals receive the shingles vaccine once in their lifetime. I don't think that's true. Right. So so it would be nice to be able to have a system that keeps some claims as many as possible with some claims and then returns an an output and saying how confident it is about what it's telling me. Is it 20% confident, 80% confident, 70% confident, and so on. So, with John and and Isaac, we designed such a system. And what the the the method does, sorry, I'm going to go back, is it's going to take uh uh an output from ChatGPT and it's going to parse it and makes it's going to parse the output and it's going to say, "You know, Emmanuel, in this output, it's a biography of Emmanuel. It says you were born in Paris, that you got a degree in physics, blah blah blah." And it's going to parse this uh outputs and it's going to score these outputs. How likely are these claims to be true? How do you score them? We can talk about this, but we're going to assume that we have access to a scoring mechanism to assess how likely a claim has to be true. And it doesn't have to be correct. And then we're going to try to process these scores in a bit a way I tried to process my affinities to try to weed out some claims, keep others so that I maintain about 80% of the claims, or otherwise I have a useless system. And when I return the text with some claims removed, I want to be able to give you a probability of that it is correct. And we'll say, "Hey, well well, what does it mean, Emmanuel? You want to tell me a probability that it's correct? It's correct or it's not correct. There's no Nobody's uh drawing uh uh throwing dice here." Well, yeah, that I agree, but when I say 80%, I would like to say that 80% of the time, when I say 80% and I look at whether it's correct or not, 80% it has to be correct, not 85, not 75, 80%. Okay, that's what I mean by 80% chance of being correct. All right. So, so we used a lot of statistical ideas to do this and it's not simple. Uh but um we know you could how to score whether a claim is true. Well, we could use LLM as judges or we could ask the thing many times. If you ask an LLM the same question many times, you're going to get different answers. So, to see whether something is correct, you might use as a notion of correctness how many times what the frequency with which it told you something. Or we could ask other LLMs to say, "Do you think it's correct?" Right? So, you can actually get these scores and then the question is it's like in the previous vignette where now I've got these scores, they're completely unreliable. Like, what does Gemini know about the shingles vaccines and stuff? And then the question is how do I take these scores and make something reliable out of it? So, we found a way to do this and maybe I won't explain the method in the spirit of uh keeping up with my vignettes, but um well, you know, so we have different topics. You know, I can ask you medical questions about different areas of medicine. Um I have to be very careful here that, you know, I want it's not that I was you know, marginally I want to give you to tell you something that makes sense. But I would like to tell you something that makes sense regardless of the medical question you asked me. That is, it would be not okay to be calibrated for, I don't know, things that is not dangerous and completely off-mark for things that are quite dangerous. So, you want more than just marginal validity, you want validity conditional on the kind of topic we're discussing. And so, how you do that, it's not uh completely trivial uh matter, but uh maybe I'll jump to the conclusion, if you allow me. And um the conclusion is that we have a system that will score each claim, evaluate the likelihood of a claim, will keep those likelihoods above a certain threshold, will weed out the one that will, um, be below. And, uh, that will achieve a certain conditional validity. That conditional mean on the type of medical question I'm asking you. And so, uh, this system, uh, is, uh, works well. And so, what that means, it means that when we implement the system, and we going to try to retain as many claims as possible, and at the end, because you forced me to retain claims, because I don't want to say Emmanuel, I can't say nothing, so otherwise nobody will use my system. So, whenever we issue a probability that the claim is correct, let's say here 65%, empirically we see that each time we issue 65%, 65 is correct. And that holds regardless of the medical topic that, uh, you care about. And so, this is, I think, interesting because it says that, you know, it's trying to build a form of statistical quality control around, um, what AI does and tells you. So, you want to process the output of AI in such a way that what you read, you have a sense of confidence in in what it's saying. And it's extremely important. I also work for companies, and for companies we try to automate a lot of tasks with AI. For example, one task we try to automate is compliance. Compliance, I don't know if people know what this is, but well, maybe I'll I won't keep that. A company has to when it tries to automate systems, you want to make sure I have a sense of confidence whether it did it well. And so, how do you decide that? And so, these are some ideas to do this. Okay, so this is now the second part in of the talk where we're going to try to discuss um how we can improve model through post and pre-training. Okay, so um probably people know that when we we train LLMs, we have both a pre-training phase and a post-training phase. The pre-training is very expensive, we'll talk about it. The post-training is well, you kind of try to improve the fact after you trained the your model after you trained it. Um so one way to uh improve the model is to teach the model what are correct answers and what are incorrect answers. And so here a burning question in uh near San Francisco and maybe here is this. How do I verify an output of an LLM? And you know, we want to score or verify the quality. You ask a question to an LLM, how do we verify? How do you measure the quality of these answers? And I can tell you that um human verification is extremely expensive, so perhaps some of you have been approached by um big AI companies to verify proofs or things like that, but it's very expensive to pay professional mathematicians to do like things like this. And you should know that now human verification is extremely expensive, and a lot of budget is actually allocated to this. A cheaper version is to use LLMs themselves to kind of verify whether an answer is correct or not. So this business of verification um has become very important. It's very expensive when I try to involve humans. It's far less expensive, of course, if I have AI verify AI. But can we can we actually make progress? So we're going to look at a a toy problem, and that toy problem is um simply this. I'm going to ask an LLM a question. So, among the following exoplanets, which one has the highest density? All right? And um as probably you know, is that when you ask or you rephrase a question several times, an LLM will be happy to give you several answers. We've discussed this before. And so, um it can say, well, I think I'm going to choose answer A or B or C or D. And when you probe the thing several times, it's going to give you different answers and different rationals. And the question is, once you probed it 100 times, which one is the correct answer? And we could say naively, well, if it says A is the most, then I'm going to say that it's A. But that's not clear, right? And so, what you could do then is you could um ask other LLMs, which are going to be So, the rows are going to be the different answers you get, and the columns are going to be judges. And so, the judges, they're going to co- basically try to assess the quality of these answers. So, if they scored high, the answer is likely to be correct. If they scored low, it's likely to be uh wrong. And the question we ask is, not knowing which one is the correct answer, how can we use a data frame like this of rows are our answers, columns are question, to actually select the best answer? All right. So, we're going to see a method that does something like that. And uh what's nice about this method is that it's completely unsupervised. I don't know which one is the correct answer. I don't have I don't know. I I don't have Y value. Like I don't know. So, and again, having a rich calibrated set where I have the Ys, it's not practical. I would have to pay people and millions of dollars to get it. So, I don't have it. Okay. So, so I want to kind of give you something which is a bit toy, which you might find surprising the first time you see it. And the toy thing I have is that this. If you don't like LLMs and and judges, think what kind of sports do you like in Switzerland? Do you follow soccer or What? &gt;&gt; Skiing. &gt;&gt; Yeah, but skiing, okay. Suppose you follow the Champions League in soccer. I don't know if you do. And you're going to have tomorrow you're going to have 16 match-ups. And you have forecasters. They're going to say this team will win, this team will win, etc. But you the the games haven't been been played right now, right? You just have forecasts. And the thing is, is it possible to build a super forecaster from these people? And what we learn is yes, you can. Under some condition, you can. Even though I have no idea who's going to win the games. All right, that's what we're trying to do something here. We say, "All right, let's assume to make my story a bit simpler that the verifiers just issue one minus one, minus one. We think the answer is wrong. Plus one, we think it's right." Then under some conditions about these forecasters, there's a beautiful result due to Parisi and Oh that say that I could look at the columns of this data matrix. So, V VI is a judge, and VJ is another judge. And I can look at the covariance between VI and VJ in in this case across answers, or in my soccer example, across games. And if I make some assumption about these forecasters, and I'm looking at the covariance, I'm going to It's going to reveal something very beautiful. And what it reveals, it reveals that the covariance between forecaster I and forecaster J is of this form. It's 1 - B squared. B is a class imbalance. That is the likelihood that an answer is correct minus that it is not. It's a class imbalance times a product of two vectors. I mean, 2 pi I times 2 pi J minus 1. And what is pi I and and and Uh I think Yes, I got it right. So, pi I and pi J are roughly the accuracy of forecaster I and pi J similarly for forecaster J. Defined as the average of what we call their specificity and their sensitivity, that they give you the correct response uh conditioned on the status. So, under some assumption, some mild assumptions about your problem, you have this incredible thing, which is that the covariance of your forecast, at least if you remove the diagonal matrix, has rank one. Right? Because it's a product of a vector times another vector. So, now if I look at an empirical covariance matrix of my forecast, I remove what's on the diagonal, and I can estimate this rank one structure, then basically I'm estimating the quality of my forecasters. If I can get a by estimating the rank one component, I can estimate 2 pi this 2 pi minus 1 vector. So, immediately I know which forecasters are good and which one are not good. And then of course, when I'm going to average them or I'm going to ensemble them, if you will, I can give more weights to those forecasts that are forecasters that I know are accurate. All right, so so this is what the method is going to try to do. It's going to try to take this data, compute a covariance matrix, make sure through three-point correlation functions and lots of complicated things that we are under sort of this condition where this a good approximation of diagonal is rank one. So, it's going to be a lot of data processing. After that, we're going to extract the first PC, if you'd like, off-diagonal. That PC informs me about the quality of a forecaster. And then, once I have this, I'm in business because I can really pay attention to what the good forecasters tell me. And okay, so that's the the method. We're going to make sure the condition of the results hold. And so, for that, we're going to do some data pre-processing. We're going to estimate the accuracies of the verifier. And then, once I have these accuracies, I'm going to sort of weigh more heavily the accurate forecasters. And the results are quite surprising, which is that So, you have no no data of any kind. You have no idea what the ground truths are. And so, here we look at some benchmarks in the field. And so, we have some GPQA diamond is a science benchmark, and we take a model. And then, you know, if you take the first answers that comes your way, the Gemini, which in this case here is model that answers the questions, has a 42% chance of responding correctly. So, this is what people called in the field the pass at one. The dash line is the dash line that you see at the top. Oops, I'm going in the wrong direction. The the line that you see at the top is the pass at 100. So, this is an oracle that looks at the 100 answers and pick the right one if there is a right one. So, unachievable. And so, what we show with this kind of fuse method is that you can dramatically increase the accuracy of the quality of your answer. You can correct a lot of wrong answers. And so, here we see a jump in 22% accuracy on the first benchmark, 21% and 10%. The last benchmark is tough. This is the IMO guys. So, this is International Math Olympiad. And so, we improve the accuracy on that one as well. And um the blue line is very interesting because the blue line is basically another group at Stanford worked on this problem, but with label data. So, they have a supervised method, we do not. So, ours is completely unsupervised. I'm not saying our method is better, it just does not have supervised data. It does not ask you for you to annotate stuff. And it has sort of the same accuracy if not a bit better. So, all right. So, this is how also you can use statistics to kind of improve post training by actually discovering improving the quality of answers that NLM can give you. And of course, then you can distill that type of stuff. Okay, the last thing uh that I want to talk about if I have 10 minutes. All right. So, Martin is very kind with me today. So, it's we're going to synthesize some uh data now. And so, this is going to be a bit strange to you. So, I'm a statistician and I've worked on pre-training. In fact, we in my lab and of course, collaborators, we pre-train models. And how did we do that? Well, we collaborated with industry obviously because there's no way in this at the scale of academia you can do something like that. But I'm going to show you some some work in this direction. And how uh I'm thinking statistically maybe can help a little bit. Okay. Um I assume people are familiar with pre-training next token prediction. It's maximum likelihood estimation. We try to find a parameter of a transformer model architecture that would give the largest likelihood to uh corpus of documents. That's simple. That's a good question. Um Usually I have to give talks to um a lot of different audience. R. A. Fisher is one of my heroes. What would the world be without maximum likelihood? It would be very different from the one I know. Yet not many people know his name, which is a bit sad. Okay. So, what has happened in the AI world uh in the last 20 years is that more data better. So, you have three scaling laws here. We going going increase compute from left to right. We have the size of data from left to right. We have the parameters in the model from left to right. And as these things get larger and larger, the errors or the quality of the models get better and better. Okay. So, that's something you probably have seen. And there are some people who say, "Well, but maybe we're going to hit a a wall." And the whole wall that we're going to hit is that we are running out of human-generated data. And it's very plausible that if not this year the next Frontiers lab will have trained on everything ever created by humans. So, what are we going to do next if we want to continue the scaling law? Now, you don't have to take my word for it because who am I after all? Uh this is Ilya Sutskever, the founder of OpenAI. It's a very famous NeurIPS 2024 lecture, we have but one internet. Um it's actually a snapshot of the video. So, it's a a snapshot of his slide. Pre-training as we know it will end. It's not my writing, it's his writing. Compute is growing, we have better hardware, blah blah blah, but data is not growing and that's been the fossil fuel of AI. So, what are we going to do? And of course, what we're going to do depends on who you work with. So, a lot of people say, "Oh, we need to be smarter. We need to do more reinforcement learning." Okay, but that's very expensive. And of course, I'm going to argue about something a bit different, which is how about we create synthetic data to continue scaling. Now, it sounds like a um you know, what kind of synthetic data? So, in our lab we've worked on on a lot on synthetic data creation to try to keep on the scaling curve that we see um after we exhausted all human data. So, the question is what kind? So, I'm going to show you one kind and you'll tell me what you think of that. Um Okay, so of course, pre-training what it does, it's doing next token prediction and so of course, it exploits correlations in a corpus of document. You know, I've sure you obviously you've seen this. You know, what pre-training is doing is trying to find the most likely word that comes after the dog run out of the house to go to the and it says, "Well, park 80%, tree 10% and so on." Banana has a very low probability, right? So, and the way we build these models is by of course if tokens were random IID at random, there's nothing you can learn. All right. So, that's great and it's taken us very far. Um but I think what we're trying to do here is going to try to suggest that we should also exploit correlation between tokens across documents. So, let me just try to make this point. Um So, J.K. Rowling wrote her famous book series Harry Potter and there's a lot of documents on internet that, you know, it's maybe the screenplay of Harry Potter is a movie, might be commentaries about Harry Potter and clearly the tokens in these documents are correlated. You have a Transformer paper, Attention is All You Need paper from 2017 and GPT-2 comes online, it has a GitHub implementation, there's a GitHub implementation of the Transformer paper. I would say that these tokens are also related. So, is it not possible to exploit correlations between tokens across separated documents? And so, that's what we're going to try to do. Okay. So, the way we're going to do this is very Yeah, a simple method where we're going to take a corpus of documents and here we use a DCLM subset. For those of you, it's a big corpus of documents and so, we're going to pre-train at the scale of DCLM subset, which is trillions of tokens. And then we're going to embed these documents using Quen in this example into an embedding space and then we're going to look at which documents are closed in embedding space, which means probably semantically related. And so, the mental picture we saw a lot of mental pictures that Hong has in her head and this is one that I have in my head, which is I have the Harry Potter book and maybe there's a Harry Potter book analysis, a commentary, maybe there's a Transformer paper nearby in the magnetic space. There's a PyTorch implementation of the Transformer paper. And then we're going to do something um strange. We're going to ask a model to synthesize a You know, if I think that this is a pair, so this is document D1, this is D2. We're going to try to teach a model to synthesize D2 from D1. So we're going to say The way it works is we say this is a document one. We we blah blah blah. This is the end of document one. This is document two. Blah blah blah. This is the end of document two. And now we're going to try to give a high likelihood when we start with document one to try to synthesize document two. We're not rephrasing document one. We're going to ask the model to teach to kind of learn how to write a software implementation of a paper or a commentary, that kind of stuff. Okay? And so we're going to take a language model and we're going to fine-tune it so that it knows how to synthesize or it's good at synthesizing D2 from D1. Condition on D1. Once you have that, you can create a lot of new documents because you can take my paper, which is not as well known as the Transformer paper, and says, "Let's try to synthesize a document out of Emmanuel's paper." And that will be new text. This is synthetic data now. Stuff that does not exist in the wild that you synthesize. It might write an R implementation of my paper, a PyTorch implementation. It can critique my paper. It can say, "This is a paper. This is seems related to this." I don't know what it will do, but it will do something. And now you can actually synthesize a lot of documents like this. And now you have Internet 2 and internet three, and internet four, and internet five, and six, and seven. You can sample at will. And now you can perhaps retrain on this expanded corpus. And when you retrain on this expanded corpus, before I show you what the results you get, is I want to show you something that you're this method is actually not rephrasing at all. So, the left document is D1. It's a document that talks about it's basically a guy looking at coffee places in San Diego, and comparing them, doing various stuff, etc. And then when we ask the model to synthesize D2, and do it again, and do it again, we're going to get a lot of new documents that are not really like the first one. So, for example, the first synthesis is uh is coffee equals love. And it's going to start talking about how coffee makes you happy, the quality of beans, espresso machines, and so on. Things that were absolutely not in the first document. The second synthesis, which is this one, is far more promotional in tone. It's trying to compare the San Diego coffee scene with a New York City coffee scene, even though the first document does not talk about New York City. And so it creates new documents. And now you'd say, "Now I have a lot of new documents, so maybe I can learn from these documents." And uh Okay. So, I'm creating a lot of documents. I'm going to try to learn them. And perhaps I'm not going to bore you with all these things, but these are the kind of things that people care a lot about in the field. These are benchmarks. The top three are perplexity scores, so lower is better. The bottom are comprehension exams, so higher is better. And perhaps um I should say that what you get out of this is you get So, let's look at the trillion Terra scale. So, you have the scores of like if you train on the data I gave you alone. And because it's a very controlled experiment, I happen to hold 20 x more data. Real data. And you train on that. And your score will improve. And what you get by doing this stuff I mentioned is you get partially up there. You get sort of 50% off there. So, you get a performance that looks like 50 50% of as if you had 20 x more data. So, I wanted to show you a table where I'd say, "Well, you get the accuracy of a person who has how many times more data?" I want to solve this equation. And they said, "No, well, we did this table and that table is cost a lot of money. We cannot change it." Uh because of course training at 1 trillion uh at what trillion scale is is expensive. But what I want to show you is an unreal benchmarks, you go maybe 40% or 50% of the way towards someone who has 20 x more data than you. And I think this is kind of an interesting plot. This is what we see as a function of the compute in billions of tokens. So, probably you know that when you pre-train, you go through this stochastic gradient descent. So, here the currency is compute time. And we look at how well we're doing in terms of accuracy as a function of compute time. And so, we have three curves. We have the baseline. And so, what does the baseline do? It starts here. It's the black one. And then it plateaus because it runs out of data. It doesn't do it well. Here is the Oracle. The Oracle is going to plateau, but much later. It has not occurred yet. Okay, so this is the Oracle. It has 20 x more data than us. And the red curve is us. So, it starts higher. That's not surprising. It starts higher because at the beginning, you know, we can only make a few passes through the data, and we pass through data that is both real and synthetic, and synthetic data does not have the same quality as real data. So, we start a bit higher, but we come down, and then we pass this guy, and so we keep on on going down. And we're going to plateau also somewhere. There's no doubt that we'll plateau somewhere. Um but this is kind of what And so, it's kind of nice thing because it shows you that there's still a lot of life left in pre-training. Like, people say, "No, the future is RL." I'm not so sure. This is a form of very weak self-supervision that seems to be very effective. I think we're switching from a a paradigm where we go from Well, before we were compute limited, we had infinite data, but we're compute limited to No, we have far more compute than we have data. So, we're going to have to think about data representation, and what do I want to train on very carefully. So, I guess my time is up. Um uh and uh okay, maybe I'll skip that. I don't think we need to see that. Uh I think what we need to see are the wonderful people I work with. Um And so, this this work that I've not done alone. I tried to say this at the beginning. And so, these are the real heroes um underlying this presentation. So, these are all graduate students at Stanford. Uh some of them now have started businesses, and others are uh in academia. Um And then I have also a lot of students outside of Stanford uh who helped me do this work because you know, getting access to uh, uh, expensive resources is not easy. So, I want to thank everyone, but I will leave you with my Stanford graduate students who have just been nothing short of amazing. Thank you. &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Um, now, are there any questions for Emmanuel? I think the mic is coming. &gt;&gt; Mic is ready. &gt;&gt; Okay, thank you very much for a nice talk. So, a question related to the last part, I guess two questions. So, how important was it to fine-tune the model like instead of just prompting it to like rewrite? And the second question is I've seen that some people like iterate, I get a better model, I use that to generate new synthetic data, and I iterate like five times to even like you know, get that even better result. &gt;&gt; No, that Okay, so so that I I completely agree with you. You could always iterate. So, abso- absolutely should be in iteration mode. You should be very sequential. I think, honestly, this is So, we don't we have uh, we have uh, comparisons with baseline that uh, just rephrase things, and it is better. Because it's actually trying to get something that is not there. And so, I think we have comparisons with uh, such baseline in the paper. I think the point I want to emphasize here is that um, this is trying to The problem is when you're rephrasing, you don't have a lot of diversity. You tend to it's not that all of a sudden, by telling you this math book 50 times, by changing the verbs, but that you're going to do better on your score. Here, I'm telling you something new. And so, that's why these performance metrics increase. Should we use them iteratively? Yes, of course. &gt;&gt; Thanks a lot. Um I also have a question about the last part of your talk, and it's about very classical notions of information theoretic limitations. That if you have a given data set, there are notions of uh you know, what's the best possible error that's achievable by statistical methods based on that data set. And I'm curious whether you think any of these principles are useful to think about in this context, or when they would be useful, and whether that could be related to you hypothesizing that there will be a plateau. Um or um maybe this is a setting that's entirely different. &gt;&gt; I think these notions are very hard to make sense of in this world. I think we're very far from theoretical limits still. And I think that these um Look, we I think we live in a world where if I turn a knob of a transformer, I don't know whether it will hurt me or help me. So, in that context, I don't know how I can really answer the kind of questions you have in mind. So, for me, it's it might be great to see that one day we could use these notions, but right now I I just don't see it. It's it's kind of an empirical science. And I see these things are more like um the way biologists do work, like they're a bit like cells and I probe and I make experiment and I use my brain to suggest experiments to do. I don't think we are can can axiomatize the things so we can say oh, if you do this, this is what you'll see. So, I see this very much it's funny, it forces you to be an experimentalist. And so, I become an experimentalist the way uh a biologist is an experimentalist. Like, they have a cell, they don't know what it does, they don't know how it responds. But, what biologists do is they develop tremendous insight about the kind of experiment they should run. And that's what we're trying to do. &gt;&gt; Thanks a lot for the talk. I have a question about the medicine um uh model parts. There's one slide talk about entropy balancing distribution. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Um then my question is why the target function is entropy other than some other. Is it physical physics-based or is there is there any reason behind this? Yeah, I can understand you want to make the training set and the um test set or or unknown set more closer in terms of this &gt;&gt; Uh so, there's several reason we use the entropy. There are two essentially. One is that this is a convex optimization problem. By actually writing down the entropy in this form, I can solve this with huge number of variables in no time. Right? So, that's a good thing, right? The entropy is concave in W, so maximizing a concave function subject to uh linear I mean, they can be reformulated as if you look at it carefully, they can be reformulated it linear inequality constraints. I can bring bring to bear all the tools from convex programming. That's answer number one. But the real answer is I I I want to have a large effective sample size. I I am not sure you know what I mean by that. So, I would not want to have WI equals one for one molecule and zero everywhere else. Because then it means that basically I collapse my training set to one data point. So, I want to use to have an effective sample size which is as large as possible. Like I don't want to I want to prevent collapse. I don't want to say three molecules get all the weights and everybody is zero. Because then when I'm going to make this comparison, they become meaningless. So, I need a very large sample size. So, what I say now is I I need to make sure that the W eyes, they are as close to uniform as possible. I don't want to have sparsity. I want to have the opposite of sparsity. I want to have a training set which is as large as possible. I don't want to load all the molecules on a few terms. And that's why by minimizing the entropy, this is what it achieves. Because if I did not have constraints, the solution to this problem would be one over n, which is what I want. I cannot probably not use one over n because if I use one over n, this is not going to be satisfied. So, how maximizing effective sample size effectively am I going to get to this matching condition? &gt;&gt; Okay. Thank you very much. Hi. Thank you for the talk. Um uh regarding the last part of the talk, I'm a little bit concerned about uh training LLMs on AI-generated data because it seems like you um one can amplify uh hallucination effects if uh um if we spam, for example, the internet with 90% of uh wrong data. Are there any safeguards uh um that uh yeah yeah you have in mind for this uh synthetic uh uh amplification of the uh training set? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it's you're making a good point. Uh you're a good point. Uh for example, by creating synthetic data, I could hallucinate more than I already hallucinate on on real data, right? So what the paper So we submitted a paper. So I'm summarizing in three slides what is explained in a 40-page document. So uh we see problems, like we see like for example that the synthetic data generation when it's can you when you can prove factual correctness, it tends to be less factually correct than the real one. So that's an issue. These are things that you can try to detect and remove. We also see that as the scale of this exercise increases we saw more problems. Um uh let's see let's see if I can go back. But you're making a very good point. And we have a lot of quality controls in place to make sure that we don't do crazy stuff, but probably it's not enough. But the point I want to make is we have a 200 bit billion token experiment at 1 trillion. The problem over there are less than those over there. So as the scale increases the kind of problematic documents we we see synthesized uh is getting vanishes. And so that's encouraging that as if you do this towards higher and higher scale the problems you discuss tend to be less important. This doesn't mean that they're not there. They just mean proportionally you see fewer cases. So when we looked at the number under various metrics, the number of problematic synthetic documents that we try to weed out, the fraction here was much higher than here. And here it's a bit higher than on the real data set, but not by much. So, cuz you also have real human-created document that are problematic. And so, I think it's a real concern. Like, you're absolutely right. So, you should be aware of that, and I completely agree with you. That's a very good question, by the way. &gt;&gt; I was wondering in your last graph, was the compute time to generate the synthetic data, was that included? &gt;&gt; No, so yeah, so it's after the fact. So, yeah, maybe I assume that you gave me the the Yeah, I I took it out, but of course, I should include it. There's a burning, and that's not taken into account in this graph. I just wanted to show you the trends. That's a good point as well. &gt;&gt; But then I guess, I mean, cuz at some point, if you also add more safeguards, you know, that will &gt;&gt; Yeah, yeah, no, it's it adds. It adds. It adds, but I think what I'm trying to do is here, like Uh, so here is it run for a very long time. And this model is kind of saturating over here. This is guy saturating over here. And if performance is your metric, and data you're really data constrained, then I think the the experiments I'm presenting is makes more sense. But you're absolutely right that I should compare apples to apples. &gt;&gt; Okay, so maybe let's thank both speakers again for two fantastic lectures.
