Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                              № 4/2025
from Ob e r w o l f a c h




                The five Platonic solids and
              their connection to root systems


                                           Sören Böhm




       Platonic solids have fascinated humans for thousands
       of years. In ancient times, they were associated with
       the elements fire, air, water, earth, and aether. These
       solids are completely symmetrical three-dimensional
       polyhedra. In this snapshot, it is first explained that
       there can only be five such polyhedra in the three-
       dimensional space. For this purpose, so-called Schläfli
       symbols and Coxeter graphs are introduced. More
       precisely, the (linear) Coxeter graphs correspond to
       the (linear) Schläfli symbols that, in turn, correspond
       exactly to the regular convex polyhedra. Through
       this one-to-one relationship, it is possible to classify
       the regular convex polytopes in any dimension by
       exploiting the classification of Coxeter graphs.

1 P r eliminaries

First of all, to get notation and language clear, we introduce basic definitions
on polytopes. In this snapshot, we focus on two- or three-dimensional (convex)
polytopes. This section follows the book [3] of H. S. M. Coxeter.


                                               1
                      F i g u r e 1 : A convex pentagon, denoted by {5}.



1.1 P o l y g o n s

In the following, a two-dimensional polytope, also called polygon or p-gon, is
a shape obtained by starting with p points in the plane and going from one
point to the next through straight line segments – eventually ending up at the
first point again while the line segments never cross. The points and segments
are called vertices and sides. A polygon separates the plane into two regions:
the one inside the polygon and the one outside of it. The region inside the
polygon is called the interior of the polygon. We will focus on the case of convex
polygons, that is, when any line connecting two points on any two sides of the
polygons lies in its interior. A polygon is said to be equilateral if all sides have
the same length, equiangular if all angles have the same magnitude, and regular
if it is both equilateral and equiangular. We denote a convex regular p-gon with
the symbol {p}, see Figure 1 for an example. This symbol is called the Schläfli
symbol of the polygon.

1.2 P o l y h e d r a a n d P l a t o ni c s o l i d s

A polyhedron or three-dimensional polytope may be defined as a finite, con-
nected set of non-crossing two-dimensional polygons, such that every side of
each polygon belongs to just one other polygon, providing that the polygons
surrounding each vertex form a single circuit (see Figure 2). The polygons are
called faces, and their sides edges. We define the interior of the polyhedron
as the region inside of it and we say that the polyhedron is convex if any line
between two points on any two faces lies in its interior. A convex polyhedron is
said to be regular if its faces are regular two-dimensional polygons of the same
type, while all vertices are surrounded by the same number of faces. We call
a regular convex polyhedron a (three-dimensional) Platonic solid. We define
the Schläfli symbol of the Platonic solid as the pair {p, q} if its faces are p-gons
and q of them surround each vertex.
   There is also a notion of n-dimensional polytopes and of a generalized
Schläfli symbol for the n-dimensional Platonic solids (which are convex regular
n-dimensional polytopes). For more details, see [2, Section 20].


                                                         2
      Tetrahedron       Cube         Octahedron      Dodecahedron    Icosahedron



             F i g u r e 2 : The five three-dimensional Platonic solids.


2 T h e five Platonic solids in three-dimensional space

In this section, we list the three-dimensional Platonic solids. The main idea of
the classification is due to the ancient Greek mathematician Euclid and can be
found, for example, in [2] and [3]. The proof needs only fundamental geometry
and is easy to understand. The reader is encouraged to read the proof in [2]
or [3] to complement this snapshot.

Proposition 2.1. There are only five Platonic solids in dimension 3. Concretely
we have:
           {3, 3} = tetrahedron                   {5, 3} = dodecahedron
           {4, 3} = hexahedron or cube            {3, 5} = icosahedron
           {3, 4} = octahedron

All Schläfli symbols in the list above give rise to one of the polyhedra in Figure 2.

    One can not be sure that, given a Schläfli symbol, the associated polyhedron
is one in the sense of the definition in Section 1.2. In fact, there is no guarantee
that in the end, after “gluing” faces, the last faces match and can be “glued”
together at common edges. However, we can verify that these polyhedra exist
by giving a concrete description in coordinates as is done in [4, Section 2.10
and 2.13].
    Note that there exists a certain symmetry in the Schläfli symbols in Proposi-
tion 2.1: With {4, 3}, we also have {3, 4}, and with {5, 3}, we also have {3, 5}.
This is not surprising as for a given convex polyhedron, there is a dual poly-
hedron which can be obtained by connecting the mid-points of the faces of
the given polyhedron by an edge whenever the faces are adjacent. This gives
rise to a new polyhedron inside the other. In other words, the vertices of the
dual polyhedron are the mid-points of the faces of the given one. If a convex
polyhedron is regular, so is its dual. Additionally, if {p, q} is the Schläfli symbol
of a convex regular polyhedron, the dual polyhedron has Schläfli symbol {q, p}.
For example, the tetrahedron is self-dual, the cube and the octahedron are dual


                                         3
Figu r e 3 : The dual relationship of Platonic solids using the example of the
           cube and the octahedron.



to one another, and so are the icosahedron and the dodecahedron, see Figure 3
for an example.
   The following example demonstrates another interpretation of the last entry
in the Schläfli symbol as a rotation order. This example is crucial for the
connection between Platonic solids and Coxeter graphs, as explained later.
Example 2.2. Consider the cube {4, 3}. The first entry in the Schläfli symbol
is the number of vertices of a face, which is a regular 4-gon, that is, a square. Fix
now an arbitrary vertex S, draw a line LS through this vertex and the center of
the cube, and rotate the cube about LS such that, after each rotation, the cube
is in the same position but with a different front face. In other words, after each
rotation dS about LS , the cube looks the same but the faces are exchanged.
The rotation dS is a rotation of angle 120◦ or 2π     3 . The second entry of the
Schläfli symbol is the order of dS , which is the lowest natural number describing
how often we have to rotate the cube such that each face is again at its starting
point. Indeed, we have to rotate the cube three times about LS until the front
face becomes again the front, thus ord(dS ) = 3. Because of the regularity of
the cube, this number does not depend on the choice of the vertex S.
   It is left to the reader to check that also for all other Platonic solids listed
in Proposition 2.1, the second entry of the Schläfli symbol is such a rotation
number. Note that the first entry of the Schläfli symbol can also be interpreted
as rotation order, since it is the second entry of the Schläfli symbol of the
dual polyhedron.
   In the following definition, we associate a graph to a given Schläfli symbol.
A graph is a set of points, called vertices, connected by lines, called edges. The
advantage of this association will become clear later.
Definition 2.3. Consider a graph whose vertices are three points and connect
the first to the second and the second to the third by a straight line. This gives
rise to a graph with three vertices and two edges. Labelling the edges by the
entries of the Schläfli symbol gives a correspondence between such a graph and


                                         4
the given symbol. The Schläfli symbols {p, q} and {q, p} share the same graph,
read from the left or right side, that is,
                                                                              p            q
                     {p, q} and {q, p}           correspond to                                 .
Example 2.4. Since Schläfli symbols are associated to Platonic solids, there is
also a correspondence between Platonic solids and the graphs corresponding to
the Schläfli symbols:

             tetrahedron                                      3      3          called A3
             cube and octahedron                              3      4          called B3 or C3
             icosa- and dodecahedron                          3      5          called H3
   The nomenclature A3 , B3 , C3 , and H3 is not arbitrary but comes from the
theory of root systems. More specifically, we associate to each graph a set
of points in the three-dimensional space, called root system, which yields the
polyhedron we started with by just linking the points by edges.


3 R o ot systems and their Coxeter graphs

In this section, we introduce the root systems mentioned above. For that, we
follow the book [4] of J. E. Humphreys and refer to it for more details and
proofs. Root systems are very important objects in many mathematical areas,
for example in algebra, geometry, and coding theory. They are highly symmetric
and thus it is no surprise that they occur in the context of Platonic solids. We
define root systems in complete generality. In particular, we define them in
the n-dimensional space Rn , which is the space of points or vectors v with n
coordinates, that is v = (v1 , . . . , vn ).

3.1 Re f l e c t i o n s a n d r o t a t i o n s i n n - d i m e n s i o n a l s p a c e

For a vector α of Rn whose coordinates are all different from zero, we write
α ∈ Rn \ {0}. Such a vector defines a line Lα through the origin and α and also
a hyperplane Hα , that is, an (n − 1)-dimensional subspace, which goes through
the origin and is perpendicular to Lα .
   A reflection with respect to Hα is defined to be a linear map sα : Rn → Rn
with the properties:
1.   sα (n) = −n for all n ∈ Lα ,
2.   sα (h) = h for all h ∈ Hα , and                                                               (1)
3.   s2α (v) := sα (sα (v)) = v for all v ∈ Rn .
     For n = 2, this describes exactly the usual reflection in a line, given by Hα .


                                                          5
                                               sα

                                                         β

                                     sα · sβ


                              Lα                               α

                                                        Hβ
                                                                   sβ
                                           Hα



Figu r e 4 : Two reflections sα and sβ and the corresponding rotation sα · sβ
             for n = 2.


   Consider two different vectors α, β ∈ Rn \ {0} with different hyperplanes
Hα , Hβ and their reflections sα , sβ . The composition of the two maps sα , sβ
is a new map sα · sβ : Rn → Rn given by sα · sβ (v) := sβ (sα (v)) and may be
interpreted as a rotation, see Figure 4. The angle of rotation depends on the
angle between Hα and Hβ . The order of the rotation sα · sβ is defined as the
lowest natural number k such that (sα · sβ )k (v) = v for all v ∈ Rn .

3.2 R o o t s y s t e m s

We consider now several vectors, here called roots, and their reflections at once.
Definition 3.1. A root system Φ is a finite set of vectors α ∈ Rn \ {0}, called
roots, satisfying the following two properties:
(R1) For each root α ∈ Φ and Lα the line in Rn through the origin and α, we
     have Φ ∩ Lα = {±α}. That means that there are no other roots in the
     direction of α than α itself and −α.
(R2) For each root α ∈ Φ, we have sα (β) ∈ Φ for all β ∈ Φ. That means
     that reflecting any root with respect to the hyperplane corresponding to
     another root will again yield a root.
  As we discussed before, the consecutive application of two reflections sα
and sβ , denoted by sα · sβ , is a rotation and the set

                            W := {sαi1 · sαi2 · . . . · sαin | αik ∈ Φ}


                                                    6
of all possible combinations of reflections arising from elements of a root system
is called the Weyl group of Φ.

    For a given root system Φ, we are interested in a minimal subset that contains
all the information about Φ.

Definition 3.2. A subset ∆ = {α1 , . . . , αr } of a root system Φ is called a
simple system if

1. every linear combination of elements of Φ can be written uniquely as a sum
   a1 α1 + . . . + ar αr where a1 , . . . , an are real numbers; we say that ∆ is a
   vector space basis for the R-span of Φ in Rn , and
2. each α ∈ Φ can be written as a sum a1 α1 +. . .+ar αr where the a1 , . . . , an are
   real numbers and all of the same sign (all non-negative or all non-positive).

The elements α1 , . . . , αr of a simple system are called simple roots.

   Note that for a given root system, there is usually more than one possibility
to choose the simple roots.

Example 3.3. We want to determine the root system associated to the graph C3
(see Example 2.4). From the graph, we can compute that
                                  
                                 1      0     0
                        ∆=      −1 ,    1  , 0
                                     0        −1    2

is a possible simple system. This will become clear after the definition of a
Coxeter graph of a root system. To find the other roots to complete ∆ to a
root system Φ, we can use the properties (R1) and (R2) in Definition 3.1, for
instance. By this, we obtain
                       
           1       1      1      1        0      0       2      0       0
Φ = ± −1 , ± 1 , ± 0 , ± 0 , ± 1 , ± 1 , ± 0 , ± 2 , ± 0                      .
            0       0       −1       1        −1        1       0       0       2

    The root system Φ is pictured in Figure 5 and the choice of simple roots ∆
is colored red.

     We are now able to define the Coxeter graph of a root system.

Definition 3.4. Let Φ be a root system and let ∆ be a simple system of Φ.
We define the Coxeter graph of Φ with respect to ∆ as follows:
   The vertices are given by the elements of ∆. We connect two vertices
corresponding to the simple roots α, β ∈ ∆ by an edge, if the rotation sα · sβ
has order at least 3, and we label the edge with this order. Since the order 3
appears very often, we omit the label in this case.


                                          7
                                                          α2




                                                    α3

                                                               α1




Figu r e 5 : Left: Root system associated to the graph C3 . A possible choice of a
           simple system is colored red. Right: The octahedron associated to
           the root system on the left.


    Now it shows what the condition (R2) in the definition of a root system
is useful for: It makes sure that the order of any rotation sα · sβ is a natural
number. If there is no edge between α and β, we interpret this as that the order
of sα · sβ is 2. This makes sense since order 1 would imply that the rotation
is the identity and hence α = ±β. But a rotation of order 2 is a rotation of
angle 180◦ or π which is a reflection. In other words, α and β are orthogonal.
    It is an interesting fact that, although the simple system ∆ appears in the
definition of the Coxeter graph, we actually obtain the same Coxeter graph if
we use a different simple system. For more details, we refer to [4, Section 1].
Definition 3.5. We call a root system Φ irreducible if there do not exist two
disjoint root systems Φ1 , Φ2 such that Φ is the union of Φ1 and Φ2 . We call it
reducible otherwise.
   With theory from linear algebra, we could show that irreducibility of root
systems can be checked by studying the Coxeter graphs, as the following
proposition details.
Proposition 3.6. A root system Φ is irreducible if and only if its Coxeter graph
is connected, that is, if any two vertices of the Coxeter graph are connected by a
sequence of edges.
   Moreover, if Φ is reducible and W1 and W2 are the Weyl groups of Φ1
and Φ2 , the Weyl group W of Φ can be constructed from W1 and W2 , see [4,
Prop. 2.2]. Thus, to understand a reducible root system, it is enough to know
the irreducible root systems or the corresponding Coxeter graphs. Coxeter
graphs can be studied without referring to a root system or a Weyl group like


                                        8
       Type:                     Coxeter graph:

       An (n ≥ 1)                                    ...
                                                     ...               4
       Bn (resp. Cn ) (n ≥ 2)
       Dn (n ≥ 4)                                    ...



       E6


       E7


       E8
       F4                                    4

       H3                            5

       H4                            5
                                    m
       I2 (m)


Figure 6 : A complete list of all connected Coxeter graphs corresponding to
            irreducible Weyl groups [4, Section 2.4, Figure 1]. The index in the
            type symbolizes the dimension of the ambient space.



Humphreys does in [4, Section 2.3 ff.]. Moreover, Coxeter graphs are classified,
that is, we know exactly which Coxeter graphs exist. In Figure 6, the reader can
find a complete list of all connected Coxeter graphs corresponding to irreducible
Weyl groups.
   The classification of Weyl groups via Coxeter graphs (Figure 6) shows that
there are only three possible Coxeter graphs with three vertices: A3 , B3 , and H3 .
We already know from Example 2.4 that they correspond to the Platonic solids.
A way to cook up the corresponding polyhedron is by using a “generalized Schläfli
symbol”, which can be found in [2, Chapter 20]. The graph can be translated
into a Schläfli symbol, which can then be easily translated into a polyhedron.
The Weyl group is, by construction, the corresponding symmetry group of
the polyhedron, that is, the set of all transformations (for example, rotations)
under which the polyhedron remains the same. Dual polyhedra share the same


                                         9
Coxeter graph, read from the left or right side. Moreover, regular polyhedra
come from linear Coxeter graphs, that means that all vertices of the graph lie
on one line and do not branch off. In fact, there is a one-to-one correspondence
between linear Coxeter graphs and regular polyhedra. Since Coxeter graphs
are classified (see Figure 6), all regular polyhedra are classified in arbitrary
dimension. In dimension 2, all Coxeter graphs are of type I2 (m), symbolizing the
regular m-gon. In dimension 3, we have the connected Coxeter graphs A3 , B3
(also called C3 ) and H3 , which are the already known Platonic solids from
Figure 2. In dimension 4, we have the Coxeter graphs A4 , corresponding
to the 4-dimensional simplex, B4 , corresponding to the hypercube (respective
dual: 4-orthoplex), F4 , corresponding to the 24-cell, and H4 , corresponding to
the 120-cell (respective dual: 600-cell). In dimension n ≥ 5, the only linear
Coxeter graphs are of type An and Bn , which are the n-simplex and the n-cube
(respective dual: n-orthoplex).


4 Outlook and open questions

The Weyl group of a root system that we have seen in Definition 3.1 is an example
of a “Coxeter group”. In [5], Kazhdan and Lusztig introduce the Kazhdan–Lusztig
polynomials of a Coxeter group W which consists of a family of polynomials, one
polynomial for each pair of elements of W . Since then, mathematicians found
significant applications across various fields of mathematics for Kazhdan–Lusztig
polynomials but there are also a lot of open problems.
    For instance, the “Combinatorial Invariance Conjecture” is one of the most
prominent open problems. An article of Brenti gives in [1, Conjecture 1.4] a
formulation of this conjecture and presents more open problems. For another
modern application of root systems, see, for example, the article “The magic
of 8 and 24” of Okounkov [6] which is a popular science article about the work
of Maryna Viazovska who won the Fields medal in 2022.

Acknowledgements I sincerely thank the editor for her many helpful sugges-
tions, thoughtful revisions, and the valuable time she devoted to the manuscript.




                                       10
R e f e rences

[1] F. Brenti, Some open problems on Coxeter groups and unimodality, Open
    Problems in Algebraic Combinatorics (C. Berkesch, B. Brubaker, G. Musiker,
    P. Pylyavskyy, and V. Reiner, eds.), vol. 110, 2024, pp. 23–37.
[2] J. H. Conway, H. Burgiel, and C. Goodman-Strauss, The symmetries of
    things, Wellesley, MA: A K Peters, 2008.

[3] H. S. M. Coxeter, Regular polytopes, Methuen & Co., Ltd, 1948.
[4] J. E. Humphreys, Reflection groups and Coxeter groups, Cambridge Studies
    in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 29, Cambridge University Press, 1990.
[5] D. Kazhdan and G. Lusztig, Representations of Coxeter groups and Hecke
    algebras, Inventiones Mathematicae 53 (1979), 165–184.
[6] A. Okounkov, The magic of 8 and 24, International Congress of Mathemati-
    cians 2022, ICM 2022, Helsinki, Finland, virtual, July 6–14, 2022. Volume 1.
    Prize lectures, European Mathematical Society (EMS), 2023, pp. 492–545.




                                      11
Sören B ö h m i s a P h D student of Gerhard   Connect i o n s t o o t h e r f i e l d s
Röhr l e a t R u h r U n i v e rsity Bochum.   Compute r S c i e n c e

Mathe m a t i c a l s u b j e c ts             License
Algeb r a a n d N u m b e r Theory, Geometry   Creative C o m m o n s B Y - N C - S A 4 . 0
and T o p o l o g y
                                               DOI
                                               10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 5 - 0 0 4 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r s                          Mathema t i s c h e s F o r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Miche l a E g i d i , A n j a Randecker        Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o . de            Schwarz w a l d s t r . 9 - - 11
                                               77709 O b e r w o l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                            German y
Anja R a n d e c k e r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o . d e             Director
                                               Gerhard H u i s k e n
