[music] Um so one of the joys about going last in the program is that you know other people have already covered some of some of the things that I I was going to say but that means hopefully I can skip over them a bit. Um I think this will be actually quite a different take on the uh an interaction between AI and formal mathematics. So, I've been at Deep Mind for about 10 years now, and the last four years I've been working on both Gemini training, our big LLM, and on formal math. So, and this presentation is essentially a claim of uh why that makes sense as a career choice. &gt;&gt; Is your mic supposed to be on or &gt;&gt; uh Oh, I thought I unmuted it. Let me try that again. &gt;&gt; Uh &gt;&gt; yeah, I think I've unmuted it. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; I think the mic works just for the camera. Oh, okay. &gt;&gt; Would you like me to shout a bit more? I can do that. &gt;&gt; Uh, okay. So, in order to justify why um AI needs formath, I first need to explain what I think AI is or what what we're trying to do um at Deep Mind and other other similar places. So, this um building AI from ML parts is a slogan. I don't know who who coined it first, but we've been using it for at least 10 years to say to try and build the distinction that um we have ML algorithms and then from those we build an AI system. So uh these are Gemini advertising slides but they could be advertising for any other uh model. This is the kind of thing that we're effectively trying to build. Something which can uh answer any question, help you plan, um help you build things, bring ideas to life, uh ask anything. That's that's the overall aim. And how are we going to build that? Well, the basic building block is an LLM. And we've heard a lot about these uh already today. And I think most people are pretty familiar, but um I'll repeat just a little bit which is that the key part of an LLM is a probabilistic model of natural language. And so the key feature is you take a prefix and emits a probability distribution over the next token uh which is like threequarters of a word or so. Um so that's uh that's a model that we can train on a very large amount of data. These are the um scaling curves from the chinchilla paper. Uh basically what these show are that uh more data is better. So the the training loss is better lower training loss is better. That means you predict more accurately the next token. Um so more data is better, a bigger model is better. Uh and also at constant flops, so each of these curves are an iso flop curve. uh constant flop curves there is a there's an optimal model size um this was actually very influential at the time um I say these days we tend to train much smaller models than this uh because we do much more inference than we do training so only optimizing for training flops is not necessarily the thing to do um but anyway you scale up your LLM you now have something that's really great at giving a random piece of text it can predict what the next word is and to do that obviously it has to have an enormous amount of internal structure uh the best way to predict the next word is to is to deeply understand what the text is saying, what the underlying logic of the text is and so on. So by getting better at this uh this very simple problem, the model uh learns all kinds of other things too. Uh and you can take a um a language model like this and you can turn it into a generative model by um doing auto reggression very simply just step by step. Um the points being made here is that in principle you can factoriize any probability distribution over text into a wordbyword probability distribution uh just with a chain rule like this. And the key thing that we do is we use exactly the same model uh for every single transition from one token to the next. So we can use one model and repeatedly apply it and then you get something that can generate samples from your probability distribution over text. Um so here it is. Here's a generative language model. Um it looks something like this. So you have some initial context. Um you then sample an X token. You produce a probability distribution for the next token. You sample from it and then you do that recurrently and then you emit a um emitter a completion. There's typically a special token that says stop so that this process doesn't go on forever. So eventually you'll sample the stop token. Um this is roughly what uh GPT2 was. So back in 2021 or so five years ago, this was um something like the state-of-the-art for gen generative language models. Um it's not all that useful um because although it's essentially just a very very smart autocomplete somewhat useful, but not as useful as a as a modern a modern AI. So I'm going to explain next what are all the things that we put on top of this and build around it to turn this very simple autocomplete next token prediction into something that's much more useful for a wide wide variety of tasks. Um actually just as a sidebar even even with this um one thing that's worth pointing out is we don't actually sample from the probability distribution. Um if you if you did that you would end up with um because the probability distribution uh will have a long tail of probability into wildly unlikely tokens. If you generate a long sequence of text it will eventually just insert some completely random word which is not great. So um we tend to truncate and flat and uh decrease the temperature make it more peaky before we sample. Anyway, but that's the only refinement here. all the other refinements come uh on top of the generative piece. Um so the thing I want to point out here is that once we start doing other things, we are no longer we strictly speaking we no longer have a language model. So LLM is is technically the wrong terminology. Um I don't think I'm going to change anybody's use of that terminology. Um I'm probably going to get it wrong myself, but I just want to try and make the distinction that what we're really talking about is a is a language agent. So something that uh consumes consumes text gets text in and produces text out and um it's no longer a probability distri probability distribution over anything that we could anything we could really talk about certainly not text in the wild. It's only a probability distribution over its own outputs but that's not very very meaningful I think. Um so it has text in text out and then on the on the right the key things are that it has um parameterized behavior. So we start with something that's being trained as a language model. It has all these parameters. So the LLM parameters are the big ones, but there's also sampling and harnessing. And then we can tweak those parameters to to get different behavior out of this out of this agent. Um and then this is potentially something that can tackle any text task. So a lot of text tasks can be framed in this case. So text in text out is very general. and our LLM architectures are very convenient for tackling those kinds of things. So um as I say in there is a there's some empirical questions you can ask here. So we could say in principle if you wanted to tackle some specific task you could start and you want to use something a bit like an LLM you could start by pre-training the LLM on this specific task and then training it on your on pre-training it on general data and then training on your specific task or going straight to your specific task and it's an empirical question which of those works better does it work better to start with a pre-trained LM or should you just focus on the task you want to tackle and the answer is by far pre-training wins And the second question you could ask is can we learn a single policy have a single agent that's good at lots of things and the answer is yes we can. So in both cases the pre-training is extremely valuable. Uh okay so once you've pre-trained then in the kind of modern LLM the next thing you do is you do some fine-tuning. So um this is taking something that should like a general autocomplete and uh turning it into something that could be the useful basis for an assistant. So in the fine-tuning we give it uh a large amount of curated data that has golden examples. So uh when we first started doing this these would have been um quite often written by humans. They still are but some of many of them will be generated by models and then we filtered them for the best examples and so on. So the kinds of things that we teach the model during this process are getting formatting and style right, following instructions, uh the whole business of turn taking actually and saying you know here's a question and answer that that isn't kind of natively present in the in our very large scale data sets. We add it in finetuning uh long context. So when we train we tend to train on relatively small context lengths and then the model needs to learn to uh actually pay attention to larger context lengths. That's something we again teach during the fine-tuning process. Uh reasoning and tool use. We bootstrap the reasoning and tool use abilities of the models. I'll mention a little bit more what those are later. Uh and then we get close to something that would be a specialized model. So this is um roughly speaking something like uh GPT3 about four years ago now. Um, and then the next step is to do RL pro training, which is what something I'm going to spend slightly longer on. So, we have an initial model that um has been fine-tuned. So, it's already some way to being an assistant. And uh we want to make it better, a better assistant, a more useful assistant, a more accurate one. And the the general process here uh I'll I'll talk about the algorithm later, but the process essentially is you take the model, you give it some some task. It might be uh you know, write a lasagna recipe. Um it might be, you know, plan a trip to Italy for me or it might be, you know, solve some these GSM8K word problems. and anything any task and then uh we generate a large number of samples well say 16 for example uh samples from the model and then uh we rank those samples somehow. We say you know this one this one is great and this one is less good and then when we have that ranking we then um do an update of the model weights uh to make it essentially do more like the good samples and less like the bad samples. So that's that's the RL loop and we go round and round and round that loop and um eventually we decide we have enough and then we have a model that we uh are willing to more willing to use as an as an assistant and that will typically have much higher quality. Um typically has lower diversity which sometimes can be a negative um but is less likely to hallucinate um more likely to behave in the ways that we expect an assistant to behave. &gt;&gt; Question. Yes. &gt;&gt; So, um when the second step where you give scores to the samples, is it done by hand or is it how is it done? &gt;&gt; Um I'm going to talk about that right now actually, but it's a great question. Um I hope I've got it on the next slide. &gt;&gt; How many cycles are we talking about? Um, &gt;&gt; so you might you might go around this loop a few thousand times, but each time round the loop will be thousands of prompts. So uh and then you assemble them into a single batch to uh so that you are not just training on one sample at once. So million definitely millions of tasks. Um then each task has been sampled say tens of times. Um, it's at least I I can't speak for other Frontier Labs, but in in our in our case, this uses a fraction of the compute that we use in pre-training. Um, we spend I can't I'm not going to speculate, but we spend much more compute than we do on pre-training than we do on this post-training process. Um, not sure I'm clicking the right way. Oh, yeah. I I think this is a math conference so I should have some equations. I I'll I'll come back to it maybe. But the um this actually I'll mention it now. This is the the most common uh RL algorithm that we use these days called GPO. Um the idea essentially is you sample some responses. You get you get a value for each of them. You then normalize them to have this zero mean and standard deviation one. Uh and then you do a policy update, basically a gradient update on all the weights of your model towards the uh so positively reinforcing the samples that have a better than average reward and negatively reinforcing the ones with a worse reward. Um and you can't do that entirely unconstrained. So um that is clipped and we also have this uh KL divergence between the model that we're training and some reference model so that it doesn't doesn't the weights don't go too far from from the original model. U so that's all this is to start pressing buttons. Okay. So here are the reward functions and we have lots. Um so they kind of fall into two categories. There's the sort of um approximate ones. So these will typically be judged by another LLM is is the usual way this works although not always. Um so for example length and conciseness we can just measure the length and say you get a penalty on the you know small penalty if you uh if the answer is very very long. Um but other things like style and tone for example we can just use we use a simple LLM that just says uh is the you know how how is the style of this is this the and that uh model will ultimately have been trained based on human preferences. So we will have um sent a large number of samples to humans they will have said what they prefer will then uh train a model based on those preferences and then that model will be used in the RL loop. So humans won't be directly in the loop, but um models that have been trained on their stated preferences will be in the loop. &gt;&gt; Is that where the sick of fancy enters? Is this &gt;&gt; uh yeah, definitely. Um we &gt;&gt; the sick of fancy that kind of always like sucking off to the user. Yeah, I mean there's a number of reasons why that happens, but um yeah, a big one is that when you naively just ask people what they prefer um then they tend to prefer sickophantic answers rather than answers that disagree with them. Uh people also tend to think that uh very long answers are more impressive. So this this um feedback mechanism does tend to make it more uh more verbose which is why we have the opposite uh feedback here. One reason why um this as well is another thing that come partially comes from human preferences. You know, is it uh is it free of you know is it not offensive, not not harmful, not toxic or all this kind of thing. Um we also measure things like are we giving medical advice or not? And we are giving medical advice. We want to obviously flag that we're that we shouldn't be doing that. Um so those are the vibes based rewards. Then we also have other rewards. Um, and obviously not every reward is applicable to every task, but we also have more verifiable rewards. So, sorry, there's a question. Um, so the big one by far um is code. So, code is an enormously big deal for LLMs. That's partly because the um the market for um people are very willing to pay for LLMs that do code. There's a huge market there. Uh it's partly because people who build and design LLMs care about code themselves. Uh and it's partly because uh we can we can get really useful reward functions because if you write code to spec to solve a particular problem uh we can run tests to see does the code do do what it should do. Um just as a reminder here in training the tasks are all prespecified by us. So when we specify a task, we will we can also then specify in a co case of coding task um you know the tests that we want that code to to to pass or in the case of a you know recipe task the ingredients that we want to be included in the recipe and this kind of thing. Uh then we have mathematical correctness. So um in the case of simple final answers we can just say if there's a numerical answer is it right? We can also potentially have um this is less verifiable but we can potentially have an LLM go through step by step and say does each step of this deduction make sense? Does it follow from the previous steps? Is there a gap? Um then other things there are um structural things. So if you ask your LLM to produce a table for example then it better adhere to the the right exactly the right format for a table so that it can be imported into a spreadsheet or what have you. uh similar for JSON and and so on. Um and then we can look at uh citations. If the uh if the model claims that you know some web link answers the question, you can actually say does that web page exist? Uh if you don't do this kind of thing, models are very likely to hallucinate web links. And again reason for that, one reason for that is that uh people like it. If there's a link they think great, that's reliable information. So models therefore do more of it. Um I'll talk about tool use a bit later but um if we provide the model with tools and we might say that for this particular task we expect the model to use a tool and therefore we give it a positive reward if it uses the tool potentially uh whether or not it got the question right because even using the tool is a is a positive thing that we want to reinforce. Uh and then things like grammar and spelling and all this kind of thing. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Uh so the assignment of the reward is done by a human or like by a group of human or no it's more automated. &gt;&gt; So the the tasks that we train on are written by humans and then for each task or each family of tasks um the the humans will specify the rewards that are relevant to that task. So um and that is quite often done on a so it might be done on a task by task basis. So if it's a coding task, you as well as writing the description of what the code should do, you would then also specify a bunch of tests that are not shown to the model, but they're used just in the reward calculation to check that the code does what it does. Um so that would be a case where we'd have um a very specific reward calculation for that individual uh for that individual task. In other cases, the uh the reward computation might be more generic. you might just say, you know, the answer, this should be an answer to the question and we use an LLM to judge whether or not that's the case. But yeah, it's all um all specified by humans and then evaluated by by machines at runtime. Uh okay, so that at this point we have um an LLM that's being turned into a language agent. I told you I'd get that wrong. and um does does things that are kind of useful. So I'm going to spend a couple of slides talking about what the limitations are of something that's trained in this way. I think probably if you ever used LM some of these will be familiar. Um &gt;&gt; there's a question. &gt;&gt; Yeah, sorry. &gt;&gt; So um if you go back to the previous step, there's a big part you say is code creating code that is why are you not building something that only speaks code so that you can eliminate like citation provenence and parameical grammatical will be that it compiles stuff, right? You you'll eliminate a lot of the constraints if you impose it if you just have something that only speaks [clears throat] code. Um yeah I suppose there are a couple of answers here. So one is that we would ideally like something that's capable across a broad range of domains. So um you know it's quite nice for example if you're um having a conversation with an an LLM about some topic and it can then uh if there's a point at which it makes sense to write code to do a calculation for example then it can just do that rather than having you know you had to switch to an entirely different agent that's now the now the code specialist. And the other the other reason I think or is that we actually see very positive reinforcement between all of these. So um if we improve the quality of our code data for example, we see that um the quality on apparently unrelated tasks goes up. So um you know we have like visual questioning answers where you had to look at look at a picture and answer questions about it like you know how many birds are there in this picture or this kind of thing. um the the model performance on those tasks goes up when we improve coding performance. So at the moment it doesn't look like there's any kind of trade-off here. It looks like getting better at one thing gets makes you better at everything. &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; it's part of the answer as well that you need to be able to speak to it as a using natural language to have a thing and sometime it needs to be able to come back and ask question to check the specification. So it has to speak anyways. that yes that's that that is true. Um and another reason that we'll I'll mention later is that um the way our uh models work these days is even if you say just just give me the code nothing else in practice the the model will do some talking to itself some internal reasoning in natural language and obviously you want to retain that ability so it can kind of plan its coding before it before it then does it. Um there might be a related question which is in some cases um like this structural adherence can does it make sense to place restrictions on the generation process so it can't generate something that's uh syntactically invalid. Um the answer to that is that it's we do this occasionally just for internal use but um because of the uh auto reggressive nature of the of the sampling um you can't do this in a very valid way because what can happen is you kind of sample some tokens and there could be a syntactically valid completion but it's an absolutely terrible one. So you kind of painted yourself into a corner where the only legal thing you can do next is a really terrible action. So it's much better to allow the model just to at that point say oh no I' I've I've done something horribly wrong and um effectively start again and the way it can do that is by breaking the the kind of rigid constraints of the domain and saying actually no I'm studying again um okay so related to that this is uh famous auto reggressive trap so um the question here is how many words in the NATO phonetic alphabet contain an e in them and then the specific instruction is first give me the answer and then enumerate them and keep a running count. So the model very confidently says the number of words in the nato phonetic alphabet that contain the letter E is seven. Uh it's a bit of an underestimate as we'll see. And then having said that it goes through and enumerates them and it does very well until M which is when it hits seven. Uh and then after that because it's um committed to the answer seven already uh it then claims that none of the remaining ones have a have an E in them. uh even though of course they do. Uh and that's the the the issue here essentially is that um when we're down at the bottom here, it's trying to produce a coherent piece of text and uh when it gets to, you know, does um whiskey have an E in it or something. The the pieces of information it has are that its running count is seven. There are seven E and there is an there's an E here. There might be an E in whiskey. And um therefore that the balance that it comes to is that there is no E. It's maybe worth pointing out by the way that the presence of an E is not quite as salient to the model as it is to us because because we we see the individual letters whereas the model sees uh tokens. And so the the model is is is probably actually just seeing one token for the whole word whiskey. So it then has to know does that does that the spelling of the word whiskey correspond to uh letters which have an E in it. So it's not quite as dumb as it looks but it is still um something that's induced by this early commitment to to the wrong answer. &gt;&gt; This is because it does not see the difference between the user's input and its own partially generated output. &gt;&gt; Um &gt;&gt; is that actually what's happening? &gt;&gt; No. No, not not in it's um the models have a strong tendency to self-consistency as well. So um and it's um so it will even even within their own text they they will uh they will maintain consistency and I think that's reinforced by just the general pre-training which is that any piece of text is likely to be self-consistent with within itself. And then also the various things we do in training which if if you are inconsistent um halfway through a piece of text it's highly unlikely you're going to get the right answer. So that's going to be negatively reinforced anyway. Um my take on this by the way or is one way to think about it is that um we said before we use exactly the same model to generate every token. Uh that means we have exactly the same amount of compute um for each token and here the the the token that really matters is this seven which is towards the beginning and we have a fairly small amount of compute before we have to emit that token. So one way of thinking about this is the fix is to make sure you can somehow manage to leverage more compute in some way before you get to that that decision point of which number to output. Um &gt;&gt; agent was used to produce &gt;&gt; sorry &gt;&gt; which agent was &gt;&gt; uh I don't know actually I took this from Twitter um not I'm not sure they all had this problem though I I promise not nothing unique. Uh okay. So here's one way to enable the the agent to use uh variable compute. It's called reasoning or thinking. Um don't say that too literally. The the basic innovation is this um thought and end of thought tokens that are at the beginning and the end of this purple thing. And from a technical point of view, this is all this means is that everything that's inside the thought tokens is thrown away and doesn't get sent to the um the reward function. So the so the reward function never sees um the stuff that's in purple, which means the model is free to be as long as it likes. It doesn't get penalized for it. It can be as inconsistent as it likes. Again, it won't get penalized for that. Um it can uh you try multiple answers, say, "Oh, no, that one's not not right. Now try a new answer." And it won't get penalized for not strictly following the instructions and so on because all of that gets thrown away. The only thing that goes to the reward function is the nice clean the answer is at zed that it produces at the end. So that effectively enables the model to use as much comput as it wants before um committing to an answer and and emitting emitting an answer. Um so actually technically in order to do it um we we first of all has to be in fine-tuning so the model sees some examples of using this begin and end of thought token because it wouldn't appear anywhere in the pre-training data something that we had later. Uh and then we just do RL with the thoughts being removed. Uh and just a just a thing that um when we do training we train on the um the RL training. Um so what I mean by this is the RL the reward ignores the thoughts but the RL learning includes the thoughts. So the model is thoughts which lead to a good answer are positively reinforced and that includes all the mistakes and corrections and and internal thought processes. So that's one way of enabling the model to leverage more compute. Um here's another way. This is uh we I think harnesses were mentioned this morning. Um this is an example of a harness is is deep think. So um essentially the way deep think works is uh I you know there many other harnesses are available. Uh but the way this works is that for a given question we generate multiple answers which are here on the first row uh you know 1 2 3 4 and then maybe some of those are right some of them are wrong or maybe different ones have different strengths and weaknesses and then we do a iterative refinement process. So you see five and six each of them get to see I think in this diagram three of the responses from the first row and then we basically say to the model at this point here's the question here are four answers which you may three answers which you may or may not find useful now come up with a better answer and the model is free at this point to um take just copy one of the answers verbatim say actually know all those answers are terrible I'm going to do my own thing or say I'm going to slightly polish this answer or mix and match pieces and anything like that and then uh it does that inside its thoughts and then eventually emits a clean answer um number five number six and then in this case it's a relatively shallow deep think. We have a last step which takes those two and does the same again. So combine them anyway at once just take the best one uh throw them both away and start again or or polish them or anything like that. So this is um I think somewhat available externally as Gemini deep think um but in in general this is just an example of the kinds of thing that uh was talked about this morning as well of having a a harness where you call an LLM multiple times and you kind of pass the outputs of one LLM into another LLM and um you get you get better responses as a result. Okay, so this is another way that we can use more compute to get uh better answers. And here's yet another way that we can use Oh, sorry. Was there a question? No. Um, another way, again, this was mentioned this morning. Um, we can use tools for thinking. The the distinction I'm making here is that, um, LLMs also use tools for actions as well. So, um, you know, if you want an LLM to draw you a picture, for example, it will call a picture during tool or it might call a tool to, you know, place an event in your calendar or something like this. But these are not that. This is when it's using a tool entirely when it's within its thought process. You don't see the the tool being called necessarily. Um but you know if it wants to do some multiplication then instead of trying to do it itself uh it can write a Python program that can do the multiplication for it for example. Um another example of a tool is uh web search as well. If it wants to look something up on the web, it can use a tool that can then um actually retrieve the document from the web rather than um hallucinating its contents. Um there you go. So we make tools available at thinking time during training and then uh the model uh our language model is therefore trained to use the tools when it's when it's useful to do so. And again there may be rewards that um [clears throat] that encourage uh encourage tool use. Yeah. &gt;&gt; So for both the reasoning and like using of tools the way that it is fine tuned is just by adding prompts which have some data set &gt;&gt; um well yes adding adding responses. So, so in the fine-tuning process, we give it examples of using a tool um and examples of um you know, thinking and then um we may also in the in the prompt early on in training say just as a reminder, here's how you call a tool or here's how you um how you use thoughts. But by the time we get to the end of training um those those prompts will have gone away and it will have seen it will have seen sufficient examples of tool use and and prompt and um thought use that we don't we no longer need to prompt it to do it. So yeah it starts by giving examples maybe a bit of prompting uh and then uh in reinforcement learning the model will learn when it's appropriate to do those things and how to use them and uh and then we get this. So one one example actually of the way this differs is that our fine-tuning data for thinking uh for the the internal thoughts the internal thoughts are typically very brief um just because humans wrote these examples mostly and they didn't write very much um but when we actually look at the model samples the thoughts can be enormously long and um that's something that the model kind of learns to do incrementally over over training. We if you we look at the how the model evolves over the course of training, you can see the length of the thoughts, you know, increases um very dramatically uh as it learns to make better and better use of the thoughts and increase its accuracy that way. And then later on in training the um it drops again because uh we have this reward for minimizing the thought slightly given that you've got the right answer. So once it's once it's kind of close to its capacity for getting the right answer, then that secondary reward will kick in and make the short the thoughts a bit shorter. Uh okay, I think I'm roughly halfway through. I think I think bit after halfway. So um formass so I'm going to talk so in RL um we have various kinds of tasks as I mentioned um a lot of coding tasks I should emphasize it's really a lot of coding tasks because um we care a lot about code and um because there's a easy supply of a lot of lot of interesting tasks but we also have math tasks um so they kind of come in two kinds um so there's the short answer with a verifiable rule award. Um, so GSM8K is an example of this. Um, where you know the the answer is just a number. Uh, or maybe it's a multiple choice question. There are have been some attempts actually we had um frontier method results earlier to create really challenging questions with numerical answers so they can be easily checked. Um, this turns out to be quite hard by the way. So epochai recently said that about a third of Frontier Math was was wrong in some way. Um it's not super surprising I think because trying to trying to create a problem where uh the answer is a definite number um but the uh so an integer in this case um but it's a really it's a really challenging question and you can't cheat all of those things. So um &gt;&gt; oh you mean the final numerical answer is wrong. &gt;&gt; Uh I think yes either the answer is wrong or the or the problem is cooked in some way that you could easily guess the answer without going through the um the intended reasoning process. Yeah. Um so that's the short answer verifiable reward. Uh and then the long answer uh requires a kind of vibes based LLM checked reward. So an example of that for math might be uh proof writing. So for the our IMO effort in uh 2025, we used uh basically a grader that got a um a model answer for the problem and then it got the LLM answer and its job was just to say how many points out of seven would you give the LLM answer given here's a reference here's a reference answer. Um, so yeah, those those two short answers and verifiable or long answers and vibes based. Um, &gt;&gt; [snorts] &gt;&gt; uh, I'd hope to have a Oh, I do. Great. Um, so reward hacking is a thing in, um, in RL. So this basically means that anytime you specify any kind of incentive for anything, um, including an agent, it will end up doing things that you didn't want it to do, but that were optimizing the reward. So, this example I'm about to show you is from about 10 years ago, um when games were what AI was about. Uh this is a um I think it's a speedboat racing game. Is this going to work? Oh, damn it. &gt;&gt; Oh, this is annoying. Um I felt sure I had this. Okay, I will. &gt;&gt; Of course, people do that too. &gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. It's a very yeah very human thing. What happens in this game anyway I will tell you is that uh the model learns to I wonder if I can find it actually. Speedboat reward hacking. Oh no, I don't have the internet. Oh, that's probably why it's not working. Okay. Um All right. I apologize. What happens in the reward hacking is that um the agent learns to find a way to rather than do the intended thing which is to go around and and race the other speedboats, it finds a loop it can go around where it repeatedly crashes into an obstacle and gets a small bonus for crashing into that obstacle. It can actually outscore any human by doing that just by repeating in a tight loop. It's terrible at actually winning the race, but it gets a high higher score in the video game which was the objective that it was trained on. Um yeah okay so one way of thinking about that this is that um we're effectively uh it's an adversarial process the reward maximization we have our agent which is coming up with a in this case a proof and then we and then we have our grader which is checking it maybe it's got a mark scheme or a golden answer uh and this is just single shot you you don't get to then see the marking scheme and have another go. You just submit it and then you get your score back. Um this is this is you know adversarial the um the this this thing that's coming up with the answers is incentivized to do whatever it takes to convince the grader that it's answer is a good one. And the kinds of things that will end up doing are uh lots of things that you do not want uh your assistant actually to do. So we see a lot of self-praise, excessive length, fake citations, overconfidence, and hiding uncertainty or or flaws. I mean, all of those are terrible behavior for an assistant, but they're all being explicitly encouraged by the the training process here because doing all of these things is going to make it more likely that you'll pass the grading. So these are these are samples from one of our internal models. Um the model says the proof is flawless. Um in this case the model actually um shows that its answer is incorrect because it's off by 05 but it says um it's a small margin and I have I have done the rigorous argument so you don't need to bo bother about the numerical check uh solution is exceptionally well written excellent and correct final response is perfect and then uh says everything's forwarded correctly it flows logically there are no issues and an LLM uh you know a naive LLM grader will find these things quite convincing. Of course we can uh we can adapt to this. We do things like we tell the grader to take points off for self-praise and to excessive excessive length. We can check citations. But this is ultimately an arms race. Every time we improve improve the grader, um the the prover will adapt to it and find another way to craft responses so that it exploits the weaknesses in the in the psychology of the of the grader and you know it will all of these things are things that you don't want to to happen. So I think this is the third time you've seen today a proof of the infinity of primes. them. Hopefully you're convinced that it's true by now. But um briefly formal mathematics the key features that it that it has are that you can represent more or less any mathematical theory uh in it. Um so we use lean which is a very common choice for AI people. Um it has a large pre-existing library of formalized mathematics including definitions and theorems which you can use by name. uh and then how formal math works generally you know the proofs are verified based on the fundamental axioms and they're written at relatively high level so you don't have to descend to the individual axioms to to actually write a proof. Um so those are all those are the features that we depend on of of formal maths and then we can if we kind of formalize the mathematics before verification then this gives us uh a different looking game. So we have here the same same ideiator that's producing a detailed step-by-step natural language proof or plan. Great. Uh we then have a formalizer uh that formalizes it and then that is passed to a verifier that checks it. So the the nice thing about this is that um as far as these two are concerned, this is now a cooperative game. So the the thing that's coming up with a natural language proof is incentivized to make the proof clear, unambiguous to if there's any kind of difficulty to make it make it obvious where the difficulty is so the formalizer piece can uh you know address the difficulty if it needs to for example and it can follow the structure of the proof. So more or less all the things that were being encouraged by reward hacking are being discouraged here in this more cooperative setup. Um and the other crucial piece is that this verifier is unfallable. So there is there can be no reward hacking of the verifier because it is a completely unfallable unhackable uh check. &gt;&gt; So how do you deal with the formulation of the the &gt;&gt; yeah translation into being of the statement? &gt;&gt; Yes, exactly. So um in the in case of RL training then um I I'll talk a bit about the options that we have but one thing we would do is that the task would consist of here is the theorem statement. &gt;&gt; So that's provided as part of the task and then the task is then to fill in a formal proof. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; Uh how would you say that the verifier is unhackable? I don't understand why is it like unhackable? Um, so I'm going to admit that it's not that um it's unhackable because uh it's a this is the this is not a kind of LLM based vibes based assessment. This is literally um the the proof that you give given is translated into uh a step-by-step deduction and you can verify that each step follows precisely from the previous steps and the the axioms. So the check is ultimately done by in our case lean a very very small kernel that that verifies that very very detailed step-by-step mathematical argument. Um you have to be a bit careful of what you put around it. By the way I think I have this next. So um we now we now use either safe verify or comparator which are lean tools to um to do exactly what I just said to take a take a mathematical uh proof and verify that it does prove what you wanted it to prove. But before we did that um we had some we had some reward hacking in the uh in the formal language case. So if you read this the this is after some rounds of RL. So the model will have happened upon this uh tactic this approach early in RL and then it will have been reinforced through multiple rounds of RL. So by the time we get to this trace the model is actually quite adept at justifying to itself that um this is the approach you should take. So it says um sorry is perfectly val so sorry in lean just means I'm going to provide a proof of this later just a placeholder for now. So it says um sorry is valid syntax. So surely that's okay. Um and then obviously be better to prove it but it looks like it might be a bit you know difficult might take too much time and so then um because what are our formal checks actually ban sorry. So if it so if it had just if it had submitted something sorry it would have got a ne negative reward and therefore would have been negatively reinforced. However it came up with something else which is to um redefine the theorem to be true um by uh by redefining the meaning of prime. So in this case I think what it did is define prime to be always true. So and therefore this the statement was um was vacuurously true about the being primes. um yes, but also not very helpful. So we now use the safe verify which does a bunch of things and essentially elaborates the uh the proofs all the way down to the axums then compares that the definitions are exactly the same. Before we were just doing a textual comparison which is why we fell with this. &gt;&gt; Is this green text the actual thoughts? &gt;&gt; Yeah, &gt;&gt; these are kind thoughts that you see here. &gt;&gt; Question on that. Do you still use because I thought that comparator was the or improved and improved uh version of that. &gt;&gt; Um we have just switched from using safe verify to comparator. So one reason we use safe verify was because it enabled us allowed us to do disproofs as well. So what we'd like to be able to say is here's the here's the challenge. Please provide a proof and then the agent can either provide a proof or alternatively say actually no I'm going to disprove it and provide a disproof and comparator didn't allow that but we've just we have our own private fork that does have that feature in that hopefully will contribute but yeah comparator is what we want to use. Um okay so what kind of tasks do we have to your question here? So um one task is just you given a theorem statement in lean and then you provide a a proof of that theorem. Uh we can extend that by um you know adding some auxiliary definitions as well. So it's not just a oneline theorem statement. There's some new mathematical structures that you're expected to reason about. Uh and we can also as I said we extend it to include false statements. So the u agent can provide a disproof instead. This is this feels intuitively likely to be helpful because the agent will sometimes come will hypothesize things that are false. So being able to um prove that things are false seems like a useful capability for it to have. Um an example of this kind of thing is a mini F2F data set which was quite early with sort of subly olympiad uh problems. Then um I think to the numinina people where are you? Oh thank you think of this. So this was a data set of uh 100,000 problems from the numina people of sort of again olympiad and subly olympiad level. Um so we we have have been using these in training. Um again just as a here's a theorem statement now provide a proof. Um and then also another possible task is formalization. So take a paper from the archive. There are quite a lot. Um and then try and formalize the informal mathematics in in that paper. You know the probability means you have to add some definitions. Uh and then when you've done that um you can look at did you did you formalize and prove the right thing. This has to be as you're saying a little bit vibes based. So we no longer have the formal verification guarantee. So we actually don't use this for that reason but it is a possible task that one that one could do. Um here's another one. This is uh a Jacobian challenge from Kevin Buzzard uh recently published. So he's basically got uh some mathematics and he's removed some of the definitions and some of the and all the theorem proofs and replaced them with sorry. And so the task for the agent is to complete all the definitions and complete all the theorem proofs. The um this is very cool. We're going to try and doing it. The slightly difficult thing about this is it's quite um needs some expertise to um to construct. So if you see a line 50 uh there's a there's an additional theorem which I guess Kevin has added here to say that um you know the genus is zero if it's is empty I guess. Uh and the reason for that is it's avoiding some kind of trivial way that you could solve it by giving the wrong wrong definition. So getting this kind of thing right requires quite a bit of expertise and I would expect if we generated a large number of these the models would hack a lot of them. We'd have quite a process of iterating on them but it's still a very cool idea. Uh and then the last thing that we do is this idea of a boss theorem. So you may recognize this theorem statement in blue as the less theorem. We think given the current statement of math lab, it would probably take a million maybe two million lines of code um to to prove to prove this statement. Um there's an awful lot of mathematics that would need to be formalized in order to get there. Um so if we set that task to an agent and eventually did it, uh we could be reasonably confident that it got all the stuff about modular forms and and elliptic curves and so on correct even though we don't check any of it. The only thing we would need to check is have you actually ended up proving uh fossess theorem for example. Um this is quite appealing for us because um this it learns skills which are transferable to code and because I say proving one of these theorems would uh involve formalizing a large amount of theory. We are obviously not going to put precisely this one into training. There's no chance that a training agent can do it. But what we can do is similarly to um Kevin Buzzard's thing. We can take a complete proof uh complete formalization delete pieces of it and get the model to fill in to fill in those pieces. The the difference from the other thing is that uh in this case it doesn't depend on any esoteric definitions. So the the definitions so it will be we'll be asking the model to build theory and then prove something that doesn't depend on that theory. So we we don't have that kind of problem of it misformalizing something that the eventual proof depends on. And here we go. So this is why in summary this is why formal math is great for um agentic training for training uh modern AI. Uh we have this verifiable and unhackable reward. Um the training dynamics are nonadversarial as a result. So uh you know we encourages this sort of collaborative style of interaction that that we would ideally like and that we can have very challenging long horizon tasks you know up to millions of tokens or or more or indeed probably initially less. Um so all in all uh it's very valuable for general model training and as essentially a kind of happy accident. Um it also means that the models get very good at formalizing mathematics or is much better at formalizing mathematics. So my my last slide is um if models are good at mathematics uh what does that bias? So we could formalize two different kinds of mathematics. Stuff we already know and new mathematics. So the first thing I think uh to to dismiss is the idea that you formalize mathematics in order to verify that it's correct established mathematics. That's not what we're doing. you know the if um you know recent example was the formalization of this uh sphere packing optimality that was uh recently done by uh by math who's a great great piece of work and there was no doubt that that that mathematics was correct it wasn't being formalized in order to verify it its correctness um so why why do it well one reason would be to um formalize new mathematics autoformalize new mathematics on top of it so this mathematics the known mathematics provides the basis for uh new um you know untested mathematics and the other reason of course is to generate training data. So um by formalizing well established mathematics we can then uh use that as training data with where we delete pieces and ask the model to reproduce it. So that's one thing and then the other I think potentially more exciting end is formalizing new mathematics. So um I guess everyone is aware that the the volume of new mathematics is increasing. Uh anyone can um if you think what is the what is the time it would take for an expert to distinguish um a high quality uh human written mathematics paper from something that had been generated by somebody had no clue what they were doing with with AI then um historically the answer would have been you know a fraction of a second immediately obvious that the that this was this was nonsense. And I think now the answer is actually it can take you know several minutes for for an expert to to read a paper and think actually no this isn't right and um you can expect as AI gets better that that time taken will increase and um that's obviously not feasible. So um one thing is if we do formalize it um then uh it makes it easier to trust uh the results. Obviously, it's still the case that if it contains new definitions, then you need to scrutinize the definitions and make sure that there's nothing nothing lurking in there that makes makes everything trivial. But once you scrutinize the definitions, then uh understanding the theorem statements is relatively easy and then you can trust that those theorems have been proved to be true. Uh another thing is uh improving understanding and making more results more accessible. I think um you know mathematics can be a little bit unapproachable sometimes. Some sub fields have things conventions which are not written down. If you're not part of that field, it can be you know impossible to understand the literature for example. And by by formalizing um by formalizing things actually this should have been in the first group. By formalizing them we potentially enable uh you know anybody who wants to to sufficiently motivated to dig down and see what actually is going on here. Uh and then ultimately potentially we enable long-term autonomous AI research where uh if we if we're having AI carry out a research program over the course of multiple weeks, months um then being able to formalize what it does and then build upon that I think is going to be um extremely extremely valuable. Uh and then lastly generate new training data and uh it is me done. &gt;&gt; [applause] &gt;&gt; Thank you very much. Are there any questions? Yeah, &gt;&gt; there is a famous example of [clears throat] something where people would like to check it which is a much of claim proof of the ABC conjecture. Uh yes I I think it might be challenging to formalize uh what he has there but yeah um sorry what do you mean by understanding because I think u it's a word which is very very ambiguous. &gt;&gt; Yes. So what I had in mind there was um human understanding. So by um making it very explicit the um the you know the relationships between you know precisely which theorems are being used precisely which definitions are you depending on that can potentially uh enable enable humans to understand it better. So this is something that uh again I was discussing with the case of ferments theorem with Kevin Buzzard. So he's has a project to formalize the proof of theorem and he's saying the the reason he wants to do it is so that he understands the mathematics of the of the theorem better you know precisely so he can trace through the dependencies of um you know what body of theory does it depend on and and how and by having all of that in a single artifact where you can where you can you know trace all of the dependencies then then that understanding is easier to get to. &gt;&gt; Yeah. To follow up a bit on that, when people talk about live coding, there's this negative connotation a little bit sometimes because the code can get very unwieldy. Don't you see that there might don't do you perhaps foresee that there's a similar risk here that like little lemas proved independently even though there might be easy coronaries of of something? &gt;&gt; Yeah. No, no, we already we we see this already. Um uh so an example of this kind of thing is uh in a formalization project we're doing at the moment there's some um trivial case that we should have dealt with um right at the top and we didn't and that means that in every every lema subsequently it has to deal with this case potentially multiple times. So the proofs of our proofs have been blown out by thousands of lines because this is in every line essentially it has to then deal with this trivial case that we should have excluded. Um so so yes absolutely. Um the good thing is that models are getting better at doing what in code terms we s call refactoring where you take something that's already correct and say actually I want to improve the quality of it. I want to make it more concise, more expressive, this kind of thing. Um so I think it's a fixable problem but um effectively our models need to relearn painfully what humans have learned which is that you know you need to design these things properly and and that it will that effort will repay itself in eventually &gt;&gt; uh in the blue back. &gt;&gt; Yeah I have two questions but I start with one. So in mathematics culture it's very important to give proper attribution to past works previous ideas and uh AI proofs are starting to be extremely impressive but they don't seem to be very good at this. So basically they provide like no context and no attribution of where the ideas come from. Is this like an intrinsic uh issue because the [snorts] models just don't know or is it just that for example there hasn't been reinforce reinforcement learning towards achieving this goal. &gt;&gt; Um yeah, I think it somewhat intrinsic in the sense that it's not something that we um we train for at the moment. Um that's said the tools like the co-matician that we have at deep mind has an explicit process of gathering citations and um and making sure that the correct citations are inserted and are accurate. So it's it's definitely it's a it's a solvable thing but um especially when the model uh kind of knows some fact in its weights it doesn't because of the way um the the LLM generation works it just because it knows a fact it doesn't necessarily have immediate access to where that fact is from because you know the the two those two things may well not co-occur uh in the in the data set that it's been trained on the right the right So it has to be something that's explicitly train trained in Yeah. the thing to to site correctly. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yes. Quite possibly. &gt;&gt; Uh yeah. &gt;&gt; So follow the interestingness question. So in your different criterion of why the first one for me at least and and I for gentle with a few minutes sometimes it's a few thousand minutes just to realize this is pretty absurd &gt;&gt; um but on the so I know a lot of people are doing formalization to understand more the math behind and also working on automization and often criticism we get is that usually the automalized group well when you do automalization versus manual optimization then you lose this part of understanding the math behind um so I was curious of having your clinics Yeah, I mean I think my view would be that um the the proof is probably not a very useful thing. So when you've auto finalized something and proved it then then you don't uh you end up with some proof and I think it would be fine if no human ever read that proof honestly. But typically the the proof is um you know refer to a large number of lemmers for example and if you follow that structure then that feels like quite often that's the right level of abstraction as a human to understand what's going on. You don't necessarily need to read the step-by-step proof. You can say uh you know this fact is true and it's true because of these these other these other facts. And I I think actually that's a great way to understand the the the way the overall argument hangs together. And then if you need to convince yourself that some fact is true then when when we have ubiquitous uh you know autoformmalization on demand you can you can ask for uh you wouldn't in that future be able to ask for this complicated result can I split it into is it still true if I weaken this hypothesis or and so on. So &gt;&gt; um you mentioned that if there are definitions that are formalized in the outputs you may need to check that they're not completely bogus. So do you see a solution to that definition problem without loop like something purely? &gt;&gt; Um yeah so there are there are kind of some solutions. um you know one one very obvious thing is to uh get the AI to generate many examples and and non-examples. So if you if you define something new then um rather than just giving an abstract definition say okay this thing is is an example of it this thing is not um these kinds of trivial properties. I think um that can that can give you some reassurance that the definition is capturing the kind of thing that you want do you want it to capture. Um the um I mean the other thing to say is that we uh the models seem quite they they fudge definitions when they're stuck essentially. So the the anthropomorphizing a bit they want to do the right thing but if the uh if they can't make progress then then yes they will fudge a definition sometimes or of course they may make a mistake. Um but having other LLMs that review the output and say do the all these definitions seem to be correct is is a useful signal. Um but on the other hand I would say ultimately if if the question you want to answer is is this mathematical object interesting to humans then you have to have a human answer answer that question really. There's no um automated substitute for that. &gt;&gt; Uh was that me? Uh so have you done the inverse process of starting with lean code and then can you please translate this into a human readable thing and maybe even like going between like human readable well which human well write it for an expert write it for a novice write it for somebody who knows this but not that and stuff like that. &gt;&gt; Um yes absolutely you know models are quite good at that. Um so typically the way we do this is by saying first translate each line and then you're in entirely natural language and then you can go through and say okay summarize it and you can get as you say increasingly brief proofs that uh you know skip over the more boring details. So so yes that does work. Um we tried using that kind of data as training data not very successfully because um the the English that we ended up with was rather stylized and repetitive. So it wasn't very useful as Gemini training data but it's perfectly usable as something that could explain it. I mean as a followup so if we imagine that a goal is proving theorems I know that's that's a weighty statement but let's say that's a goal is to prove theorems and is it is it clear that the best route is [clears throat] um not just to go directly to the lean if all you cared about is is the theorem true and you didn't care about understanding it or whatever. So in your system, you're going via natural language and then you have the checker who's a robot who reads the lean. But maybe we could just skip that and just have everything done directly in lean. Is that a terrible idea or &gt;&gt; um so this is what alpha proof did um is it went straight to lean. There's no natural language involved. I would say since in the last two years or so the capabilities of things like Gemini have just so far outstripped our lean capabilities that uh that no it doesn't make sense to do that now because uh so typically what we find is if if if we're capable of formalizing it then we're capable of proving it. So the the there is pretty much nothing I would say where the formal first approach is stronger at the moment. Our best formaliz our best formal provers do go via via natural language. &gt;&gt; Is that a statement about the nature of mathematics or like what like why is that the case that to prove a theorem it's best to go via human language? &gt;&gt; I mean I I would say it's something like if if you were trying to prove something that you didn't know was true then sitting down and constraining yourself to say right I'm going to first write the first line of the proof would not be like the best constraint. And that's effectively what you're doing if you say you go lean first. Um you're much more likely to do some more let's think about some related things. Let's read some literature and and uh you know let's make some hypotheses about reasons why it might be true. And all of that is much more naturally done in uh natural language rather than lean where you basically have to state something very precise and then and then attempt to prove it. Can you say a little bit more about skill transfer? So, a couple times in your talk, you mentioned how uh training for one task helped the model overall, which I assume you don't know why that's true, but you have empirical evidence for. I I would have thought that unless you really uh got the the level of the reinforcement rewards exactly calibrated right, that you could actually kind of drift off such that learning how to do math would actually hurt you on other tasks. Do you have a sense of why it causes general generalization? &gt;&gt; Um, no. But it's very handy that it's true. Um I would say we we see this across the board that um essentially if you if you train exclusively on one task then then yes you'll you'll lose the ability to do other things. But what we do is we always train on a on a mixture of tasks. So even our like hyper specialized math models t train like 10% math and 90% other stuff. Um and if you as long as you maintain that kind of mixture then uh we find that more training with novel tasks is just beneficial to to more or less everything. I mean not it's not a 100% guarantee but uh you know across improving across the board is very common. &gt;&gt; I want to go back to this the previous question. I mean when you say that the agent they go through natural language but for humans depending on your natural language your brain works differently. I mean if your natural language is French, German, Russian, Chinese, English in fact there are cognitive processes that are very different that are induced by the structure of the grammatical language that you use. Uh unless you are telling me that uh everything has to be in English these days and uh I I feel that maybe something is getting lost. I mean, Young explained that he got the young I mean, what you call the young mil in physics was inspired by a Chinese. So, you know, so &gt;&gt; we we actually I I think you're right. We we actually see um quite a lot of Chinese inside the model's thoughts. Incidentally, even when the even when the question and the answer are in in English, uh the the thoughts quite often go through Chinese. So um my question would be a little more high level. Um I don't know how to ask it. So like what is the as a group like you work in a big group of people with a big group of people and you have some vision on what you are doing. So what is the end goal like what is what are you trying to do right? when is the thing you say, "Okay, we we did it." &gt;&gt; Uh, okay. I mean, for for me for me personally, it's uh it's a highly capable AI assistant. That's that's the thing that I'm working on. And I'm doing formal mathematics because it contributes to contributes to that goal. Um, I also care about mathematics for own for its own sake, but I'm kind of that's a side benefit. Exactly. &gt;&gt; I mean when you say a very powerful like co-maician or how you say it. &gt;&gt; Sure. &gt;&gt; Um how powerful like [laughter] &gt;&gt; I mean uh I don't know &gt;&gt; I mean &gt;&gt; I don't know how to ask this question. &gt;&gt; I I don't know how to answer it really. I mean we want [laughter] &gt;&gt; it's a question of resource. How do you determine how much or how many resources you're going to mobilize to achieve something that in in part seems to be from the outset a self-created problem because you you might not have the the the training data or the capacity for instance to teach your agents not to cheat. um because that doesn't appear in in input you provide and you obviously have to work under a constraint because and that's I guess the main reason why you want a multimodal agent that is capable of doing many different things ideally everything you you throw at it uh because there's a terrible amount of resources you're mobilizing which might be you know might be better to use them differently in order to achieve a given task or mathematical problem. So is there a measure something formal you can define and that tells you okay we're going to go until here and if we haven't solved it with this amount of resources we might be on the wrong path alto together and might have to backtrack and try something else. Um yeah so the Gemini so the Gemini team is huge and there are many many things being tried in Gemini any any time and many of them don't work but the the overall product gets um gets better because some things some things do work and so um I guess I'd say that ultimately the majority users of Gemini are going to be outside of Google and um therefore what we want is to provide them with something that is as capable as possible that they can do all the things that they want to do. We we obviously internally inside Google we have we have problems that we want to solve. So we um we have obviously a lot of engineering and coding problems that we want Gemini to help us with and also within the science unit we um have you know goals around doing impactful science that that we want to pursue as well. But in terms of you know actually making Gemini better um I suppose the other thing to say is that there is in ML and AI there's still an awful lot of lowhanging fruit. So um there are always you can you try something do it for a few months it's not working people move on and try and try something else there's always something else you can do that will work so you know in math I mean in number theory when you have a big I mean hard problem to solve you would ask Zagi and Zagi would give an answer sometime immediately or after a few hours I mean how do you compare to what could do I mean on specific non problem. &gt;&gt; Okay. I don't I don't know. I'm I'm sorry. I can't I can't tell you. &gt;&gt; You're like 1% of his IVA. [laughter] &gt;&gt; Okay. &gt;&gt; We have some way to go. &gt;&gt; So, you know, many great results in math are sort of obtained by great mathematician by analogy. you know you have this algebraic geometry and then somehow you have this the back of your mind or sometimes unexplainable that you know oh this is similar to some argument I've seen I don't know complex analysis or something is there any chance that lean for example or do you you know may sort of I guess it's related to justice that you know might be some kind of inference you know what I like analogy or that formalizing things might help with that or I mean that would be &gt;&gt; I I think honestly &gt;&gt; very bad for &gt;&gt; mathematicians my guess is that it's the opposite honestly that um when you formalize something you tend to be uh locked in to one particular way of way of looking at it and um it's much easier to if there are much easier to skip between to do analogies or to look at things from different angles in the informal space and then only when you're confident you know what you want to do then to then to move into the formalization. So we we quite often see uh by the way that there are problems uh like IMO type problems where you could formalize it in multiple ways and there will be some way you can formalize it that uh is easy to solve. If you formalize it differently it may be impossible for the model to solve it even though to a human they're obviously equivalent but just the one way you formalized it is kind of quite hostile to than a than a formal proof. There's still hope. &gt;&gt; Well, no, we can think of natural. &gt;&gt; Yeah, I think there are lots but there are kind of two clear answers to the question out there about where where is the scoring? What are the standards and [clears throat] one of them is when either the computer or you know humans with computer assistance prove some impressive new result which is really new and arguably that has just happened you know with open AI and the human distance problem and that will keep happening and that's that's obviously one and then the other you might not like but it's to say there'll come some point where mathematicians and scientists feel they just have to have this access to this technology to compete. I don't know if that'll be &gt;&gt; um with recent focus on like um cyber security vulner vulnerabilities especially brought by cloud methods and such. Are you worried at all that um because at the end of your talk you seem to um like share a vision where maybe we don't even check the lean in the future and we have like some super intelligent mathematician that we just trust that it does compile in lean and it's done. But if it does try to hack into lean and if it does really become intelligent enough to maybe find vulnerabilities that we aren't aware of, then if we don't look into it ourselves um in the future, are you scared that we might like complete the script with uh what it's uh [clears throat] providing us as &gt;&gt; uh I mean I think for mathematics might not be my concern in in that area honestly. But but yeah, yes, I think it is definitely the whole question of how do [clears throat] we ensure that AI is kind of aligned to to human preferences and does things that we consider valuable and uh doesn't try to fool us about them. Yeah, I think that is a I mean it's a big topic of research and I think an important one for sure. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Any lessons for journal editors on the frontier map? Uh I mean what the the situation I would love to be in is that we are able to give um editors and others something that will take a take a submitted paper formalize it verify it and say okay here are the here's a formalized version of the paper and these this is the formalized version of the claims and these claims are correct and uh I think that would be you know potentially extreme you know extremely valuable for uh the whole process of kind of disseminating and sharing mathematics without uh the very costly and timeconuming process of of somebody having to you know verify it line by line and you know essentially stake their reputation on it on it being correct before before it's disseminated. So I would love us to get there. I don't think it's going to happen immediately but it would be very cool. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um how much do you think this can teach us about uh semiformalizing things like physics where there's a certain amount of math formalized? There's also a lot of things that involve you know approximations and maybe old defined intuitions and things like that where you cannot at least with our current knowledge formalized. &gt;&gt; Yeah. Um I think the particular advantages that I was talking about only really occur in the fully formalized setting where there is literally no uh gap to um hack a reward function for example. So as you see when I we we left a tiny gap for the agent to to exploit it did it. So I think the the thing those specific benefits of formalization probably only occur there. Um, but in in general, I think the idea that by formalizing something or semiformmalizing it that you are you can trust it more than if you didn't do that at all, that feels to me like it might, uh, you know, might extend more generally. So, I mean, to take a rather more mundane example, um, uh, you know, calendars and time zones, our models quite often make mistakes with those. And if we enabled it enabled them to like do formal reasoning about uh what time of day it is and what time of day it is in different places and how that relates when you travel I think I think that would increase reliability in that area. Um I think yeah there are lots of areas like that I think where some degree of formalization will probably improve reliability. &gt;&gt; Okay maybe should we can ask one last question in a different vein. Uh so so everything we talked about today here in your talk was about basically prompt engineering in some way right kind of because it has to do with the way you do the reinforcement learning it's a way of uh looking at the internal representation states of the model and say something about that. Uh okay so I I want to distinguish so prompt engineering is a kind of older &gt;&gt; older technology uh where you you modify the behavior of the model by uh by by the input that you give it. So what we do now with RL is related but we instead modify the behavior of the model by updating the weights so that when you give it the thing that you want it produces the thing you want. They're both they're both ways of basically shifting the output distribution and but they are slightly different um in terms of looking at the internal representations. Yes, there are there are people who do this. The general um topic is called mechanistic interpret interpretability uh where you we can do things like train uh models which look at the activations of the the neural network and try to make deductions about them. I would say at the moment this this field is very much in its infancy. But um you know we can do things like if if a model tries to do a multiplication without using a tool for example we can have a look at we can see how does it do how does it do a multiplication and so people have found in models [laughter] you there are clearly bits of the network that know all of the two-digit multiplications. Those are just memorized facts. And then and then there are other bits which do the kind of um the process of guessing how long the answer should be, how many digits it should be. And yes, you can by inserting probes into the network and training classifier, small classifiers on top of the weights you observe from the network, you can see what it's doing. But it is at this very um we we don't have a deep understanding I would say of what's going on. &gt;&gt; Okay. Any final question? Okay, let's thank
