AMS :: Notices of the American Mathematical Society
AMS Website Down
Notice: All AMS websites will be down for maintenance on Saturday, July 11 from 8 am until 1 pm.
PDFLINK
Memorial Tribute
I. Martin Isaacs (1940–2025)
Coordinated by Mark L. Lewis
Introduction
By
Don Passman
On Monday, February 17, 2025, we lost an outstanding researcher and an award-winning teacher. Professor I. Martin Isaacs succumbed to kidney failure.
Marty Isaacs was born on April 14, 1940, and brought up in the Bronx, New York. He attended the Bronx High School of Science, where he was a member of the school math team. He learned calculus from the chairman of the math department, who moonlighted in the evenings, teaching at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, a technical college now part of NYU. The chairman convinced Marty to go to Poly, where in his senior year, Marty was on the school’s winning Putnam team and became a Putnam Fellow, placing in the top tier of individual winners. This got him admitted to Harvard graduate school with appropriate scholarships.
Figure 1
.
Marty Isaacs and Don Passman at Madison in 2005.
Marty was a graduate student at Harvard University from 1960 to 1964, where he studied with the famous Professor Richard Brauer, who later received a National Medal of Science. Marty’s dissertation concerned linear groups and a problem of Blichfeld. He received his PhD in June of 1964. That summer he planned to celebrate by sightseeing and driving throughout Europe. Unfortunately, he was in a serious automobile accident in France, which left him disabled and disfigured. He spent several months in what is now called Hôpital Cochin (the hospital where Galois died), before returning to the United States. He then spent well over a year in the burn unit of Columbia Presbyterian Hospital in New York City. A lesser person might have let this accident dampen his plans for the future. But Marty left the hospital, got on with his life, and never looked back.
Marty’s first academic position was as an instructor for three years at the University of Chicago. He then came to the University of Wisconsin-Madison (UW) in 1969 as an associate professor in the math department with tenure, and was awarded a Sloan Fellowship in 1971. That same year, he was promoted to full professor, at the age of 31. He remained in the UW math department his entire career, until he retired in 2011.
During his career, Marty wrote over 200 research papers, and he was a member of the inaugural class of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society. In addition, Marty was always passionate about teaching and exposition. He was certainly one of the best teacher in UW’s math department, and he received numerous teaching awards. Indeed, he received the UW-Madison Distinguished Teaching Award in 1985, the Tau Beta Pi Teaching Award in 1988, the Benjamin Smith Reynolds Award for Teaching Engineering Students in 1989, the Wisconsin Section MAA Teaching Award in 1993, and the MAA Polya Lectureship in 2003–2005. He recently endowed the “I. Martin Isaacs Prize for Excellence in Mathematical Writing” administered by the American Mathematical Society.
For 31 years, he was in charge of the Mathematics Talent Search, which offered challenging math problems to middle and high school students throughout the state of Wisconsin and indeed the world. It is the UW math department’s leading and most well-known outreach program.
Figure 2
.
Marty Isaacs and Deborah Finch in 1987.
Marty is survived by his longtime companion Deborah Finch, his sister Rosalie Isaacs, his brother-in-law Alan Bross, his godchild Barbara Passman Brownsword, the rest of the Passman family (namely Marj, Don, and Jon), and numerous friends and admirers in the mathematical community.
Don Passman is an emeritus professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
By
George Glauberman
Marty Isaacs was a good friend, an outstanding mathematician, and a remarkable human being. I met Marty during my first term at Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn in the autumn of 1957. But I had little contact with him until I entered graduate school at Harvard in 1961. Marty and Don Passman had entered one year earlier and were much more advanced than I was. We had some classes together, and Marty and Don gave me a lot of help. We had dinner together almost every night.
Unfortunately, I had some depressing experiences at Harvard and transferred to the University of Wisconsin-Madison in the summer. But looking back, I think that without Marty and Don, my year at Harvard would have been much worse, and I would have given up mathematics.
Don was the more assertive of the two, and Marty seemed fairly easygoing. But after his terrible accident in the summer 1964, Marty showed that he was made of steel. I saw him when I visited my family in New York City. Although he was mostly covered in bandages, each time I visited, Marty was reading Scott’s book on group theory.
I was told that Marty made the doctors explain every aspect of his treatment; so that eventually, he became the ultimate expert on his treatment. At first, the doctors expected Marty to live only a short time, but they continued his treatment after they were no longer paid.
I was hired as an instructor at the University of Chicago in 1965. Marty was hired one year later, after he left the hospital. Amazingly, his warm personality remained the same after his accident. It seemed that there was always a student or a teacher in his office. I had attended the “Baby Seminar in Group Theory” for graduate students at Harvard, but I doubted that the same idea would work at Chicago. However, Marty started a “Junior Group Theory Seminar” for University of Chicago graduate students that flourished for several decades.
When the two of us attended a difficult course by John Thompson about his N-group article, we thrashed out the difficult points in the class for an hour or two by phone almost every night.
I hadn’t driven for several years before he arrived, and he was kind enough to give me a “refresher” course. He was a very patient and clear teacher. I was amazed that he felt comfortable driving after his accident.
He remained a friend after he left Chicago in 1969, and I will miss him very much.
George Glauberman is an emeritus professor at the University of Chicago.
By
Gabriel Navarro
Isaacs is best known for his book
Character Theory of Finite Groups
, his masterpiece, from which mathematicians worldwide have learned character theory. Of course, there were several somewhat earlier books on the subject—Curtis–Reiner, Dornhoff, Feit, etc. But Marty’s book has an elegance, simplicity, immediacy, and even modernity that the earlier books lacked. Stephen D. Smith writes in his Mathematical Review: “The style is clear and direct, and proofs are unusually easy to read.” Various chapters of his book, such as those on character correspondences or character degrees, appear for the first time in a textbook and became research fields generating numerous articles, many of them written by himself. Marty approached the proof of each lemma and each theorem as a challenge, and he viewed the challenge as completed only when the proof was perfect. When he said “I have cleaned up a proof” of something that interested him, it usually meant he had proved a result twice as strong in less than half the space.
Marty wrote a number of other influential books, including
Finite Group Theory
and
Algebra: A Graduate Course
. Each of these books is written in his unmistakable style: few preliminaries, the minimum necessary definitions, and most important of all, always getting to the “good stuff” (his words) as soon as possible.
Figure 3
.
Marty Isaacs and Gabriel Navarro at Valencia in 2009.
His office door, on the third floor of Van Vleck Hall, was always open, and that was where he happily received students, colleagues, and visitors from around the world. Almost all of his visitors came with questions or mathematical problems. Marty was particularly proud of directing the Mathematics Talent Search, which involved middle and high school students from across Wisconsin. From this talent search, he discovered talents including Daniel Kane and the siblings Po-Ling, Po-Ru, and Po-Shen Loh. On Mondays, his seminar took place at 3:30 p.m., after Passman’s, on the ninth floor of Van Vleck, with a view of Bascom Hill and Lake Mendota, where coffee was served before the seminar started. After the seminar, he would ask “Who is interested in dinner?” The most frequent places were Marty’s favorite Afghan restaurant, an Indian restaurant, or Smoky’s, often at -4 degrees Fahrenheit in the bitter cold of the American Midwest, where we drove in his car, always a Volvo.
Passman, another exceptional teacher, recounts that once, when he had to substitute for Marty, “It was the first time I was booed by students
before
I started teaching!” He supervised 29 PhD students during his 42 years in Madison, and he retired in 2011. Then he moved to Berkeley, where his longtime partner, Deborah Finch, lived.
Isaacs came to Valencia for the first time in 1991, and he immediately fell in love with the city and especially its restaurants. He then returned with Deborah many times in the 1990s and 2000s. In 2003, he also visited Bilbao, invited by A. Moretó and J. Sangroniz. Marty and Deborah liked to rent a car and drive around Spain. Needless to say, until he told me he was back safe and sound in the US, I was always somewhat anxious. In June 2009, we organized a conference in Valencia in his honor. Many legends of group and character theory came, for most of them their first time in Spain including E. C. Dade, G. Glauberman, R. Guralnick, B. Huppert, R. Solomon, and J. G. Thompson. Also attending was his friend, the well-known probabilist, Persi Diaconis.
Figure 4
.
Conference in honor of Marty Isaacs in Valencia in 2009; Pictured: Marty Isaacs, John Thompson, Mark Lewis, Tom Wolf, and Don Passman.
Several professors of the department in Valencia spent time in Madison, such as L. Sanus, J. Tent, and notably Alex Moretó, with whom Marty coauthored five articles (the first one when Alex was still in Bilbao.)
The last time I saw Marty was in April 2018, at the MSRI in Berkeley, where we spent a semester together, sharing an office. Then the pandemic arrived, and his health gradually deteriorated. We continued corresponding regularly until June 2024. From then on, I only wrote to Deborah for updates on his condition or to communicate with him through her. On February 18, 2025, she wrote to tell me that Marty had passed away.
Gabriel Navarro is a professor at Universitat de València.
By
Shahriar Shahriari
On the count of three, everyone together—what is the derivative of
?
$\sin ^2(x)$
One, two, three
$\ldots$
Marty taught calculus classes with 200 students as if they were a small seminar, and “all on the count of three” was one of his tricks to get the students involved. As one of his TA’s, attending his lectures was technically optional—but I never even considered missing one. Each was a master class.
The joy of doing mathematics shone through every lecture, whether it was calculus or character theory. Marty wanted you to be amazed at what mathematical thinking could do, and his enthusiasm was contagious. It was as if he was encountering a theorem or its proof for the first time, and he couldn’t wait to share his awe.
He put a premium on building intuition, yet he also convinced you that the result should be unbelievable without a proof. His systematic treatment of all the subtle points was precisely how that intuition was built.
Marty cared deeply for all of his students, but he also demanded a lot and held high expectations. If you were phoning it in, or if your proof didn’t hold up, he wouldn’t mince words. More than anything, he paid attention. He met with you every week, for an hour, and during that hour, you had his full attention.
Shahriar Shahriari is the William Polk Russell Professor of Mathematics at Pomona College.
By
Su Dorée
The last time I spoke in person to Prof. Isaacs was when he was a Polya Lecturer for the MAA, and he gave a talk to the North Central Section. I remember the lecture he gave because, as usual, he managed to translate very complicated mathematical ideas (a Conway “I know that you don’t know that I know” type thing) into an engaging and memorable talk for an audience ranging from students to experts. Whenever I talk, I try to follow his lead to define by example, and to show how getting your hands dirty with mathematics is really the only way to understand it.
He always encouraged me to do mathematical research, and while I appreciated the vote of confidence, I really never did. In my teaching career, I have also followed his lead, teaching courses from developmental algebra to the highest courses we offer. I was always so impressed that he would teach MAT 101 (or whatever it was called) and then the next hour he would be teaching character theory. As I’ve reflected back on my graduate work I think that 99% of the reason I asked him to be my advisor was because he was such a fabulous teacher.
Su Dorée is a professor of mathematics at Augsburg University. She is also a former chair of the Congress of the Mathematical Association of America.
By
Mark L. Lewis
I first encountered Marty Isaacs as a fresh PhD student at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in the fall of 1990. Marty (it is hard for me not to call him Professor Isaacs) was on research leave that semester, but the professor for the graduate algebra class had decided to use Marty’s notes as the text for our course. Those were the notes that later became Marty’s book,
Algebra: A Graduate Course
. I still have my xeroxed copy of those beautifully handwritten notes; they are among my more-treasured possessions.
Figure 5
.
Marty Isaacs with his students: Steve Gagola, Tom Wolf, Mark Lewis, and Jeff Riedl, in Kent, Ohio, in 2008.
I finally met Marty the next semester in the spring of 1991 when I took his group theory course. Until that class, I was not sure what I wanted to study in graduate school. By the second week, I still did not know what I wanted to study, but I had decided that I wanted to study with Marty. Convincing him to take me as a student took some doing. When I approached him during the semester and told him that I would like to study with him, he told me that he was not taking any new students since he already had four students. I convinced him to do a reading course in character theory with me, and fortunately for me, two of his students had graduated and the other two had gone to a different advisor by the time I took my specialty exam a year later.
In August of 1994, Marty took me to the NATO ASI on finite and locally finite groups in Istanbul, Turkey. At this conference, he introduced me to many of the practicing researchers in group theory such as Brian Hartley, David Gluck, Alex Turull, and Gary Seitz. This was the first of many conferences, I was to attend with Marty around the world and across the United States.
By
Jeff Riedl
For me, the most striking and impressive feature of Marty’s lectures was his rare ability to make difficult and complicated mathematics seem simple and beautiful. He could make it look so easy that an audience member might be tempted into naively thinking that the subject matter would be completely obvious to anyone at first glance.
Marty was a man of strong opinions on matters important to him. For Marty, when it came to writing, presenting, or doing mathematics, there was usually a right way and a wrong way. To his credit, my own personal experience was that when I listened to the justifications that he offered for his strong opinions, invariably I came away with the belief that his opinions were the right ones.
When it came to writing referee reports for other authors’ manuscripts submitted for publication, Marty had a noteworthy habit. On more than a few occasions, when his dissatisfaction with the quality of exposition reached a certain level, he took the initiative to suggest not merely a few corrections, but rather an extensive reorganization of the manuscript, spending much of his own time and effort to write a lengthy, carefully conceived referee report. I mention this to illustrate and commend the level of responsibility that Marty voluntarily undertook to uphold high standards of exposition and thereby contribute to the dissemination of knowledge by facilitating readers’ efforts to understand an article’s content. He took great pains to contribute to the quality of works of authors with whom he might not even be acquainted, and for which he might receive no more than a thank you as the anonymous referee appearing at the end of the article. These were selfless acts in service to the profession that Marty cared so much about.
Jeff Riedl is an associate professor at the University of Akron.
By
J. P. Cossey
Marty ran his group theory seminar every Monday afternoon. Of course, Marty is known as one of the greats of character theory, but his first rule of the group theory seminar was that no characters or representations were allowed. He wanted the seminar to be accessible to all students, especially those who had not yet seen character theory. Almost all of the talks were given by us students—I remember being terrified the first time I gave a talk. Fortunately, Marty was always very supportive. Don Passman, longtime friend and collaborator of Marty’s, would sit there in the front row. You could never quite tell if Don was asleep, until he opened his eyes and called you out on a mistake which he would gently fix, after which his eyes would close again.
Marty was absolutely loved as a teacher. For instance, we all know the easiest way to get good evaluations from students is to make the exams easy and go easy on your students. I can think of no greater testament to a teacher than to say that Marty did the exact opposite, and his students loved him for it. His lectures, in every class from calculus to character theory, were models of beautiful exposition. In addition, his presentations balanced intuition and rigor, and occasionally his dry sense of humor could catch you by surprise. He wouldn’t go easy on you, but his style was so clear and illuminating that he didn’t need to.
Marty had a huge impact on the lives of his PhD students. He was a teacher, mentor, and a great role model. After finishing my PhD, Marty continued to support my research, both as a coauthor, and a provider of just the right hint on a sticky problem. He has been known to decline coauthor credit on papers that he probably should have accepted—if his name was on it, everything had to be just right to his very exacting standards.
J. P. Cossey is a professor at the University of Akron.
By
Sara Jensen
It was obvious that Marty cared deeply about cultivating interest in mathematics, and anyone who wanted to learn was welcome in his office. Undergraduates felt comfortable going directly to him for help, and would sometimes stop by his office just to talk about the fun problems he would present in class. He was particularly fond of an optimization problem involving beer, gasoline, and rice. I had never before met a mathematician who was so multi-talented and so caring. After only one semester, and not knowing a single thing about character theory, I was convinced that I wanted to work with him.
My favorite Marty story comes from when I was working on my doctoral thesis. I had worked very hard and discovered a theorem that felt powerful and almost too good to be true. The proof of that theorem felt like an Isaacs’ proof, and I was really excited to show Marty at our weekly meeting. When I told him the statement of the theorem, he proclaimed in shock, “I don’t believe you!” Clearly, he was also experiencing the feeling that I had about the theorem being almost too good to be true. When I finished my proof of the theorem, he said to me “Well the good news is, I believe you. The bad news is, that as you were working out the proof, I remembered that I proved this 10 years ago.”
Marty was also deeply honest, and simply did not give out unearned compliments. When it came time for me to graduate with my PhD, Marty gave me a compliment that I will carry with me forever. Upon graduation, he told me, “Every day you worked, and every week you had something to show me. That is really impressive, and I’m glad I took you on as my student.”
Sara Jensen is an associate professor of mathematics at Carthage College.
Mark L. Lewis is a professor at Kent State University. His email address is
[email protected]
.
Article DOI:
10.1090/noti3275
Credits
Figure 1 is courtesy of Yvonne Nagel.
Figure 2 is courtesy of Professor Steven Bauman.
Figure 3 is courtesy of Professor Don Passman.
Figure 4 is courtesy of Professor Gabriel Navarro.
Figure 5 is courtesy of Don White.