third lecture is the one who's going to be really heavy duty. So hopefully we'll &gt;&gt; No, no, no. It's not I don't give a heavy duty. &gt;&gt; It's a fascinating problem and we're looking forward. &gt;&gt; Thanks. &gt;&gt; Hi. Yeah. Uh all right. So I want to tell you today about the value of errors in proofs. I'm sure you appreciate it. Uh it's not what you think, but I'll explain exactly what I mean. It's really a story about the evolution of proof systems within computational complexity theory which in my field. So I'll explain everything in this uh title. I really want to get to the end with this breakthrough result. I mentioned MIP star equal. It should be meaningless but hopefully at the end of the talk uh will be perfectly understood and why it's so important for math. Okay. So the plan of the talk I want to tell you about this value of errors in proofs and the impact it had on lots of things uh science technology you know some philosophical uh uh points and mathematics but I mainly focus on the conceptual part will not be very technical I mean there will be lots of conceptual notions but uh not very technical uh before I tell you about the value of errors in proofs I have to tell you about value of errors in algorithms and uh even before that I want to talk a bit about the connection between proofs and computations but really the main purpose is just a demonstration of one of the nice stories we can tell in complexity theory of an evolution of an idea there are many other stories I could have talked about today is about proof system and the notion of proof uh feel free to ask questions if something is not understood. So proof and computation have gone along uh together for millennia. I want to mention two points in this long history. One is the famous uklid elements. uh we all read it as basically a collection of theorems in plain geometry proved in the first deductive system from five simple actions. But really if you read any proof there or all of them they actually are effective. They actually give you algorithms to construct the necessary uh points demonstrating the theorem using very simple operations using a compass and using a straight edge. So in plain geometry computations that proofs have the same power we'll talk about the the meaning of that whatever you can prove you can actually generate an algorithm for you know go 2,000 years ahead we go to the turn of the 20 skip a lot yeah skip a lot that's another lecture uh you know Hilbert as everybody I'm sure knows has this amazing dream that in mathematics truth is the same as probability. Everything correct everything everything true you can prove and everything you can prove you can find by what he calls the mechanical procedure. This dream we know was shutters completely first by gather in his incomplet theorem showing the first equation is wrong and then by curing showing the second one is wrong that is undecidability theorem. uh what did you do? He really in order to prove undecidability had to give meaning to what Gilbert meant when he talks about mechanical procedure. So he defined yeah there are more on the other side I guess. So during defined formally mathematically what an algorithm is that is famous chewing machine is a byproduct we all know this created the computer revolution but we are not going to talk about this minor thing um we are doing math here so I'm going to talk about algorithms in this talk only for decision problem so what a decision problem is some set s subset of some universe we get an element in this universe and we want to know whether it's in the set or not. Okay, that's the decision problem and uh implicitly defined two classes the sets that can be computed by finite algorithms algorithms which always hold uh and correctly give the output for every element and re are the sets provable to finite algorithms. So this means that for every element some powerful prover can convince uh anybody else that this is the element is in the set and famously his undecidability theorem can be stated what the difference between &gt;&gt; yes so there's an algorithm that can decide by itself &gt;&gt; whether x is in the set that's decidable yeah and e is something that someone can do for you and just convince you that you know somebody gives a proof and you verify so undecidability &gt;&gt; it's important to get the difference so it's let me spend some time on it &gt;&gt; I I'll tell you no no I'll tell you in &gt;&gt; yeah yeah not a good use of word too &gt;&gt; well I am proving a theorem to you &gt;&gt; that's if I'm proving a theorem to you &gt;&gt; that's okay right yeah so you are a finite algorithm and I'm I can give you a proof you didn't know &gt;&gt; is it &gt;&gt; so let me let me just I'm sure many of you know what the problem separating these two classes are right undecidability of the problem of whether a touring machine holds or not or if you want just a second uh or you want to clarify something. &gt;&gt; I just want to make sure I understand the answer to Dennis's question. Is it that one of them is an algorithm that outputs a list of everything in the set and the other one just given an element tells you yes or no it's in the set. &gt;&gt; That's one way to think about it. I prefer that in both cases you get an element and you have to decide whether it's in the set or not. In the first case are the decidable problems you should do it on your own. You have you have an algorithm to decide yes or no and you stop. In the second you can get help from God or anybody who knows you know you can get this help from an unbounded entity that just convinces you that this is in the set and the best example is you know Turing's example whether Ting machine holds he proves that this is undecidable so no algorithm can tell halting Ting machine from non-holicing machine but if I told you that it will run for, you know, a zillion steps and hold. You can verify this, right? You run for a zillion steps and see whether Yeah. Okay. So, he proves this &gt;&gt; one is I still don't know. &gt;&gt; Okay. So, maybe &gt;&gt; which one's smaller &gt;&gt; smaller R is smaller. R is small. Everything everything you can do with a po without a prover you can do with a prover that does nothing. Okay. Everything you can do without help, you can do with help. What is what's the definition of re all the sets is a collection of all sets such that for each of them there's a way for a prover to convince you that there's a prover you know an entity that can convince you that x is in the okay this is math but I I'll take then you know the other suggestion uh here's a different definition. There's an algorithm which lists all the elements in S. That's &gt;&gt; which doesn't need to be finite. &gt;&gt; It cannot be finite if S is infinite but it's list every element in S will be printed at some finite time which you don't know. So that's so it's bigger clearly and uh yeah they are different. Okay. uh one uh point to make if you change final to efficient algorithms as opposed to just algorithms with solved when efficient I mean let's say polinomial time in the length of the input then this is really the same question which we are fighting with the previous question it's just the same uh question about the difference between computing something and proving something and that's open. Okay. So, I want to just start with a bunch of examples of uh you know the notions that will pop up in this lecture. Claims, arguments, proofs, proof systems. So, what is a convincing argument? Uh we want convincing arguments for these type of claims. X is in some set and we imagine uh two entities there. A verifier, someone who wants to know the answer but maybe is limited, cannot have, you know, doesn't know how to figure it out. And a prover someone is infinitely clever, but someone you cannot trust. I mean, if it tells you X is in S, you know, said I can prove the human hypothesis, you you may be doubt, you know, doubt it. Okay. And then you know the poor like in math I mean writes a paper and sends it to anybody and then uh anybody can verify uh this argument. So let's see some examples. This basically highle view of proof systems. Uh here's a proof system for composite numbers. A claim a typical claim is this number is composite. Here's an argument for it. two smaller numbers that the claim is that multiplied to this one and the verification a verifier would just check will do the multiplication and figure out uh whether it gives back inputs right so this clearly you know sound and complete only uh composite numbers will have proofs prime numbers will not have such proof uh it's a very efficient algorithm right it's just multiplication And the general of course works for any any number with so that's a proof system for the composite numbers the set of theorems in the proof system is the set of composite numbers. So I'm just uh you know getting you used to the language that's a set of theorems in this simple process. The argument we don't care how complicated it is to generate right. Uh yeah cryptography of course assumes that it's difficult. So we don't care how complic verification has to be efficient. Okay here's another example where familiar you know the claim is that this puzzle is solvable. an argument would be just filling it up with the missing numbers. Verification of course is very simple. You just check the sudoku rules. So that's very efficient. It's just pattern matching really. And uh it's really general. I mean of course you realize that suduku doesn't have to be 3x3. It can can be bigger. The theorems here are all the solvable suduku puzzles. So this you know you can there are infinitely many inputs in this problem. Also here's a familiar one like the plain geometry is piano arithmetic or lots of other deductive proof systems in math. Basically the objects you manipulate are formulas over integers. Uh you have a bunch of axioms that you are familiar with. Uh and then you have deduction rules. How to infer one formula from several others like multins here. And what's an argument for a claim? Some formula. So you claim some formula is a tology. See it's just a sequence of other formulas where each one is either an axum or follows from previous ones by the deduction rule. So by deduction rules. So again also in this proof system it's very easy to verify uh given a proof whether it's correct or not you just check whether you know this one in the list is either an axium or follows from the others. So again verification is efficient and set of theorems here is maybe more interesting than the previous two. I mean you get all these you know number theoretic statements that you can prove in this system. So what you know we can now get the essence of proof systems in general. This is something we like to do in complexity is just have class of classes of object. class of proof system. What we want the essential where completeness namely true claims have proofs, soundness, false claims don't have proofs and efficiency. It is easy to verify whether uh you know it's easy to distinguish the two cases whether a given argument is convincing or not. And again efficient we use polinomial time although many other notions were studied. We'll fix this for now. So more formally so that this complexity theoretic view translates here to uh formal definition of what proof systems are. Of course math is full of proof systems but they all fall in this category. Again repeating what I said more formally uh proof system is simply defined by its verification algorithm. Okay. It's an algorithm that takes two inputs. one call a claim the other an argument and it satisfies this condition. So if the claim is true namely X is in S then some argument convinces the verifier to accept and if yeah this is a happy case right where we call the the claim we call a theorem the argument is called the proof and on the other hand if the claim is false then no matter what argument is supplied as input the verifier will reject. Okay. So for every such verifier such algorithms there's a set of theorems that this proof system proves like in all the examples we saw and in fact NP can be simply defined as the collection of these sets uh where this verifier is just a deterministic efficient algorithm. uh you know so we have these uh examples of sets of theorems and uh P the class P polinomial time computable uh problems really is a set of the collection of sets of theorems where a verifier exists that doesn't look at the argument can do it by itself so again this is an way to express P versus NP in this language okay so this is all classical stuff this is normal p systems in math. I want to move now to proof systems that have errors. So before them, I want to talk about algorithms that make errors, randomized algorithms. Here's a quest. It's one page. I'm sure all of you have seen probabilistic algorithms. Um so you know we start from you know this observation that nature seem to produce um you know uh unpredictable events or maybe access to randomness. That's what I was talking about yesterday. Um so why not let algorithms use uh random choices? That's a point. So the algorithms that are probabistic differ from deterministic one in very simple way in deterministic algorithm if it computes some function f then this algorithm always produces f ofx it's doesn't have choices it just works and produces the correct answer always a proistic algorithm is allowed to make random choices and so the output is a random variable. What you demand from this random variable? It will equal the function value with high probability. That's the difference. So it's still of value, right? Because this algorithm still uniquely determines the function. This number is bigger than 1/2. Let's say 2/3. So that's where we introduce error in algorithms. We still allow some error uh in the computation here. And uh these two is pretty arbitrary. If you have an algorithm like this, you can easily reduce the error as much as you want. Uh for example, if you have the error was one/ird that before you run the algorithm independently k times, it will reduce the errors to be exponentially small in k. So pick any number bigger than half. So what's the value of allowing errors in algorithms? We don't like errors of course but uh you know it seems to we seems we can solve more problems efficiently with uh with the randomization uh we don't know that it's you know we just seem to that was really what I talked about yesterday wow very interesting I wonder if I said something offensive to the institution here. Uh yeah. Why? Why? What's the reason we tolerate errors? I claim that we tolerate arrows everywhere. We cross the street and we are not sure. Absolutely. We'll get to the other side. So, why not allow it in algorithms? So, anyway, this sorry. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. That's a very good point. Yeah. We It happens all the time. Okay. And this is actually a very much better situation right in this or crossing a street. You cannot reduce the arrow arbitarily. Here you can. So anyway, so these are part of life probabilistic algorithms. You know, we see them around us all the time and use them. Okay. Now we want to impose this through proof systems and I claim this is easy because we define proof systems by algorithms, right? A proof system was an algorithm. Good. So let's do it maybe. I wonder anyway. So we want to put it in into proof systems. These are coming from papers in 85. Two independent papers. One motivated by cryptography, one motivated by group theory. uh we have our classical definition of a proof system and we change it in the obvious way. We allow the verifier to be probabilistic. Okay. And we allow errors. So we want these statements completeness and soundness to just hold with high probability. Okay. So at least it's a clear definition clear mathematical definition of what the probabistic proof system is. Right. &gt;&gt; Yeah. In this case it is just high probability for the right result or some distribution &gt;&gt; right probab you want completeness soundness with high probability. So the probability over the random choices of this algorithm V the probability that you decide incorrectly whether it's true or false the claim is small right so with very high probability you you know whether the claim is true or it is false okay &gt;&gt; just the average knows the distribution &gt;&gt; no not distribution just the output it's a That's no thing you believe it believe the claim or not the claim is against some input is in some set okay but you get of course the argument right so you yeah so you just allow error and you know it's just like what happened with the previous slide we allow error in proofs but of course it's very different at least psychologically I claim for mathematicians uh you know proofs are what's supposed to You know it's holy. What's supposed to be the distinguishing feature of mass from all other disciplines. We know absolute truth when we have a we have a proof. So we allow errors and it seems like you know a weird thing to do uh but we'll we'll flow with it. We'll see that you know there's value in considering this uh this idea. Uh at any rate it's a proof system well definfined. we can still have you know all the theorems in this uh system and as before defining NP now we define IP uh the class of all sets which are you know theorems in this kind of proof systems but I didn't tell you the complete definition of these proof systems I already told you it's randomized but I'm going to add another feature to this uh proof system this is interactive I'll show it in the next slide but that's the reason It's called IP uh for interaction. So what's uh the full definition of an interactive probabistic proof system that came out in these papers? I'll contrast it with the usual NP definition where in NP we had the deterministic verifier which was always correct. In IP as I said we have probabil probabilistic verifier that sometimes makes error but with a low probability and the other difference is this argument uh in the NP proof system or in mathematics you write a paper and you send it off here we allow interaction between the prover and the verifier so like maybe happens when you discuss a you know math problem or a theorem with your colleague you may ask clarifications. You uh you know you go through an interaction at the end of which either convinced that the proof is correct or not. So uh yeah so that's the definition that's a full definition interactive proof systems allow interaction allow randomization of the by the verifier and allow small amount of error with low probability. So clearly it can simulate the classical ones. The question is how much more powerful are they? Yeah. Sorry. &gt;&gt; Does the notion of interactivity also make sense in the deterministic setting? &gt;&gt; Yeah, it does. You can have an interactive deterministic system, but you should realize quickly that it's useless because you can simulate it. If the verifier is deterministic, you know what the question he will ask. You answer you answer all questions in advance. So no need for interaction. That's a very good point. And uh in the randomized case, it's impossible to know what the verifier will ask you because it can potentially would have asked exponentially many questions. So that's an important difference, right? It's a very good point. Okay. So there's a new model here and like all new model, new compositional model, new model of proof, uh should ask yourself whether it's a reasonable model. is something you should ask in every uh model you suggest. It doesn't mean you shouldn't study unreasonable models. You should but in this case I claim it's quite reasonable. I mean first of all uh the error part this was motivated not from reman hypothesis proofs point of view but really from uh computation maybe cryptographic uh uh motivation where the type of theorems you prove to other people is I pick my public key according to the protocol or something not something that you know mass is hanging on but practical matter. So uh the other reason is of course interaction is very natural. So adding interaction is natural. Uh anyway we are going to study this model. Reasonable or not I want to stress that this is absolutely a revolutionary scientific notion. The impact of this uh idea of this definition has been amazing. Uh I'm not going to talk much about it. uh it has both you know uh you know scientific and technological impacts. I'm going to talk mainly about the math side and the conceptual side. There are many variations of course I'm not going to talk about them uh that are also practically important. Uh we will not discuss them. uh I want to mainly talk about uh how this allows proofs to have properties that are completely paradoxical and we do not expect or provably cannot be attained by normal classical deterministic proof systems. Uh the two I'll mention is the zero knowledge proof systems and proistically checkable proofs. I I'll explain them so I won't do it now. But one point is that this you know ideas of introducing more and more uh proof systems with these properties led us to even more proof systems uh in particular proof systems that were mentioned in the title with multiple provers. We'll get to them and uh eventually to quantum proof systems that I talk about at the end. Okay. So it's a yes story of a journey. The first one I proof system with paradoxical properties is this zero knowledge uh interactive proof system and uh it was in the original paper suggested in the original paper which defined IP uh so zero knowledge IP what kind of poof system is this? It's the normal IP proof system. I I should note that yeah the formal definition is quite technical but the intuition is very simple and it really captures I mean the formal definition captures this but you know it's enough to know the intuition uh it's a it's a normal interactive proof so it should have you know completeness and soundness with high probability as we discussed plus there is a demand that whenever the verifier accepts namely the claim is true uh it learns absolutely nothing about the proof. So it is convinced that the claim is true and nevertheless it learns absolutely nothing he didn't know before. Certainly not about the proof and not about anything else. So Dennis told me before the talk that he doesn't care about proofs. He cares about understanding. These are proofs which you get zero understanding from. zero, but you are still convinced that you know it's true. So this looks ridiculous if you never saw it before, especially if you try to convince anybody about anything they didn't believe without providing any information. So let's see uh yeah so it's a question they ask this question can can we which claims which type of claims can have such proofs uh and can convincing proof be be an un informative and you can think about trying to convince somebody of some proof in math without telling them anything they didn't know. Uh nevertheless, you know, this uh question has an answer which is surprising and I believe that not just Yeah. Sorry. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Could you go into a little bit more detail about like how you're formalizing what it means for proof to be uninformative? &gt;&gt; If you want if &gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, no. I'll say I'll say a couple of sentences. Of course, I you know the answer is longer, but uh Yeah. So the way you formalize it is the following. You want that in every case the verifier accepts the so it accepts a conversation. Conversation is a random variable right because it's randomized. So there's a distribution on convincing conversations for each particular true claim. Okay. You want that there will exist an algorithm that knows who the ver knows the verifier algorithm. Of course you want there exist an algorithm that can generate a distribution which looks identical to that convincing distribution. Okay. So if you can generate a convincing conversation by yourself you didn't learn anything. All right. Good. uh we'll see as soon provide a little more than that but that's a formal definition. Yeah. So uh it turns out that every everything that is provable is provable in zero knowledge. That's a theorem. We proved it a year after this after this paper. And this theorem has an assumption. It has an assumption that cryptography can be used namely oneway functions exist. For example, foxing is a hard problem. So it uses cryptography and cryptography is used to say that the two distributions I talked about the real conversation and the simulated conversation may not be identical but you cannot tell them apart. Okay. So you don't learn anything in this sense. You could not have you know gained any information in your lifetime about your about this proof. Okay. So uh this is a theorem under this assumption that we all believe if we shop online right so under cryptography. So such proofs are are possible and this led us to another question that led us to another proof system. Uh I should mention that this zero knowledge proofs are a very important concept and uh you know it has theoretical applications. It's absolutely critical in designing in general cryptographic protocols uh you know lots of systems in fact when you know 30 years ago 40 years ago it is amazing I was giving talks about it I said yeah it's a you know theoretical idea that's sort of surprising but it will never be implemented and yeah I was wrong I mean enough motivation got people to actually simplify the protocol called and there are plenty of uh applications which today use zero knowledge. Um there are extensions of this idea to the physical realm in particular one really ingenious one to nuclear disarmament that I understand got into some steps in the of nuclear missiles between the US and Russia. uh and uh yeah maybe could have been potentially implemented and also to uh things like DNA testing things where you want you have several samples of DNA of people you want to be able to uh locate the one that maybe is associated with the crime with the other knowledge disappearing you don't want to have innocent people's DNA in your stuff like that there there are many genius Yes, zero knowledge physical systems but I want to tell you about how it led to new proof systems in particular the one with multiple provers. So here's again the slide about this zero knowledge and I mentioned that it had this assumption in it namely that one some complexity theoristic assumption like fox is out and we were wondering whether this assumption is needed we can prove the theorem with it can we prove it without this theorem and uh is cryptography necessary for zero knowledge and the answer like many you know many questions is yes and no so we can prove pro with Ostroski we prove that uh it's essential so it cannot be removed if you have a zero knowledge proof for anything non-trivial then you get immediately cryptography uh but on the other hand the answer can be yes it can be it can be whatever no yes it can be removed if like we do again many times in math we change the model or change the question so here's we came up with a new model of poof systems So this again we have a new type of proof systems. These are proof systems in which there's not one prover but two or in fact you have our three or four many but that's exemplified with two. So how does this work this proof system it's just like before we insist on the usual things of completeness and soundness and the interaction is limited in the following way. There's a claim well known to all these parties that you know the claim is that some element is in some set. The provers the two provers or many provers can talk to each other deise a strategy how they want to convince the verifier of this claim and then they are separated and the verifier can interrogate each of them separately. They cannot talk to each other afterward. I mean when he starts asking questions and there are questions asked to contos and eventually the verifier decides to accept or reject. I guess this challenge. &gt;&gt; I wonder why this happens. &gt;&gt; Ah okay. So time out. &gt;&gt; All right. weird ways to do it. But anyway, um right so that's that's a model and what we were able to prove about it is that here zero knowledge can be obtained without any assumptions. So in some sense what's really happening is this physical separation of the provers uh replaces this computational assumption of cryptography. I'm not going into uh explaining it more but that's roughly what happens. Anyway it's a new model and you can ask like before whether it's a reasonable model. I can tell you two stories about it why it may be reasonable. one you know this is the way police interrogates let's say two suspects of a crime uh by putting them in different cells and interrogate them separately for you know consistency say so that's you know models in some senses uh situation in real life uh another story is that when we came up with this uh idea this paper the two institutions we were at which are Hebrew University and Jerusalem and MIT wanted to patent it. I don't know whether it's a sign of uh reasonleness. They wanted to issue a patent where you know maybe you will go to your ATM with two cards that are separated by lead and you will convince ATM that you are you and you'll get the money and no you know it will be perfectly secure. No no no assumptions no factoring anything. We advise against it. They patented it anyway and made nothing out of it. Although today it would have been different. Uh anyway, this is a model we should study. What? Yeah. Sorry. &gt;&gt; I'm a little confused how this can be done when you couldn't do it with one because couldn't you consider the two provers to be one prover who's just restricted in the answers they give? &gt;&gt; Well, restricted how? in that there's some subset of the questions they ask they say this is &gt;&gt; so if it's equivalent why not look at this picture I mean you could I mean you could define a prover who has two parts and is not the two parts are not &gt;&gt; but zk 2 is not contained in zk IP for instance &gt;&gt; we don't know that &gt;&gt; oh okay &gt;&gt; we don't know that &gt;&gt; we don't know we are struggling as you'll see to understand the computational power of these proof systems like we don't know whether np equals p will ask the same questions about this proof of systems. They are going and going in power but we are we understand some I I'm getting to that. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. This is the picture. So we defined a growing set of proof systems NP IP IP many IP like many many provers and uh for a while we just had trivial inclusions. Some of you may not be know this acronym but uh you know we understood that uh IP for example it can be simulated. So the computational power of statements it can prove is contained in polinomial space. Everything you can compute with polinomial time memory maybe not in polinomial time but polinomial sorry space polinomial memory and uh 2 IP for example we knew that anything provable there is computable in nondeterministic exponential time that's the exponential version of np. So he had these upper bounds on the power of these proof systems. Uh people believed there were you know we you know this was very generous but in fact within a few years we understood the power of these proof systems very uh precisely. So it turns out that these upper bounds were sharp. namely interactive proofs is exactly you know you can have a single proven interactive proof for every problem in polomial space you can have a two pro interactive proof for every problem in nondeterministic exponential time and I will get to the third statement soon but I want to say that in all these statements they are you know full of technical words about resources like space and time but they have all have conceptual meanings that are really uh I think surprising. For example, the first statement really says that winning strategies in games can be efficiently verifiable. What I mean by that is suppose tomorrow some alien landed here and claim to have a winning strategy in chess. We could check this efficiently, right? Checking not that he wins against us in every game. check that indeed the claim that this entity has a winning strategy in check could be uh verified by us by efficient verifiers with very high probability. This strange because this statement is not about the existence of a solution to a system of equation. It's a statement with many quantifiers for you know there's a move so whatever other move is done there's a move right so it doesn't look like it should be you know efficiently verified in normal proof system in IP camp u the statement about many pro IP containing nondeterministic exponential time is quite surprising because nondeterministic exponential time is different than P. So it contains problems that cannot be efficiently solvable that require exponential time. Nevertheless, problems that require exponential time and in fact have exponential wrong arguments can be verified efficiently. So that's another very surprising uh result. And u the third one is about a new proof system that I didn't define yet the PCP uh proistically checkable proof that I'll describe now that turns out to characterize a class a classical class entry yeah all these theorems they have no assumptions in them pure mathematical theorem so I want to talk about this second surprising or paradoxical proof system which is PCP I don't know how many people heard about all right uh so it's back to the normal non-interactive proof system there's no interaction there is randomness so here's the PCP proof system which looks just like the NP proof system right so only the verifier is proistic and we allow some tiny error but the prover sends one message to the verifier but again we put a restriction and there's restriction here is very severe. We allow the verifier to read only 20 bits in the argument. Can be random locations but only 20 or some constant that you can choose. Okay, no matter how long the argument is, this seems totally ridiculous. Maybe as ridiculous as the zero knowledge one. I mean, how can you find the bug in 100 page proof when you are reading 20 bits of the argument? Nevertheless, you know, so yeah, can you do it? Yeah, maybe I don't know what Andrew Wild is working on now, but maybe it's a hypothesis and eventually when he provides, you know, the 100 page or thousand page proof, we are supposed to verify this uh by reading 20 bits. So how can we do it or when can we do it? And again the answer is universal. You can always do it. Every proof, every mathematical proof can be converted efficiently to a another proof, another recent proof that can be verified this way. In other words, you take any proof and there is this efficient procedure not knowing whether a bug or not, but having the property that if the proof was correct, the new proof will be correct. If the first proof had a bug somewhere, the new proof will have bugs everywhere. So that random sampling will catch it. So again very surprising uh this is this our result that PCP equals NP everything provable NP is provable by uh the snapshot uh proofs. Uh yeah this is supposed to be the killer application of this theorem but of course we don't have it yet. uh um but uh it has a huge impact and the impact is mainly in the area of optimization. This because of this theorem we can now prove NP hardness you know hardness of uh obtaining approximate solutions to optimization problems. NP completeness typically tell you finding the optimum is hard. This can tell you finding a fax of two approximation or fax login approximation is is hard as well has many implications in coding co in complexity theor that I'm not going into now it's a fundamental uh theor fundamental understanding of the class np I suppose the proof could become much longer when you &gt;&gt; yes but since it's an efficient procedure &gt;&gt; it's not much longer Okay. So in the beginning it was polomial time maybe it was n to the 100. Today we know that can be done in something like n log n or n log square then so nearly linear time and you know length. Yeah. And that's again very important for hardness of approximation reduction to have this efficient reduction. Yeah. And uh this too is implemented yeah particular in blockchain systems and very important to cloud computing also to delegation of computation. Okay. So now I'm very good getting to my last part of the talk. So I told you about this uh two or three major results regarding probabistic interactive proofs and we are going to again extend the model and instead of randomized machines we allow the verifiers and the provers to be quantum. So again I need to give you a one page uh you know introduction to quantum computing like I did with publicity computing. And again I assume many of you have seen it but anyway I'll go uh through some uh basics again the way it happened that quantum computing came to the for we we you know quantum mechanics seems to govern our world u and why not use quantum phenomena in algorithms like why not use randomness in algorithms. This was suggested by uh independently by Fineman and by Manny uh suggested that we integrate it into uh algorithms and the ability the new ability it suggests by quantum mechanics is you can manipulate superpositions of uh bits. So you can simultaneously act on all two to the end possibilities of a two end string uh using unitary operations. Uh it took some time to formalize this model to make it you know the analog of the machine a quantum theory machine and the classes you know this BQP is supposed to capture the class of all problems solvable by efficient quantum algorithms. We know that it's as at least as strong as probabistic machines uh but we don't know the power of this quantum algorithms and then people try to see what kind of problems can be solved efficiently uh in this model and after a few uh small examples there was this uh you know uh earth sheltering event where Peter Shaw proved that uh in this model you can efficiently solve both factoring integers and discrete log compute discrete logarithms. I'm saying this was a a major event simply because these are the very problems that under whose difficulty underly security systems on the internet. So clearly this uh had an impact and the impact was frenzy attempts to develop many things. First of all, build, you know, quantum computers, build, you know, generate the technology and, uh, you know, build general purpose quantum uh, computers. So far, it's been many years, 90 years, 30 years. Uh, billions and billions were invested and are still being invested by governments, by companies and, uh, yeah, we still don't have it. We have a lot of technology developed but we don't have general purpose quantum computers. If you want to factor integers maybe the largest number you can fo today is 65 or maybe you somewhat higher. So it's not doing that but it's doing other things. In fact, the original suggestion by Fineman was that we should have quantum computers in order to simulate quantum phenomena and uh this we can do to some extent. Um people immediately of course try to develop since this hardness assumptions may not be hard anymore when quantum computers exist. We may want to protect our secrets with something else. So people are developing what's called the postquantum cryptography finding other assumptions and replacing systems under these assumptions like some latis problems for example people are still trying to find new quantum algorithms just explore the power of this model but what I want to focus on as the rest of the whole talk is about new proof system. So what are quantum proof systems? Again we have our template. We simply let the verifier be a quantum algorithm and the provers do because they may communicate with quantum bits. Uh first there was this suggestion this is the analog when I put star I mean quantum. So it's the same one prover proof system with in the quantum world and it took some decade. It was much longer than it took the classical case to prove the quantum doesn't add anything any power to one single proof system. Okay. So it's the same as a classical one IP uh which is P space. So that took some time it took a lot of de technical developments mathematical techniques and using many of the machinery that was developed for PCPs and so on. Uh so this was solved. We understood quantum single prover system and then in parallel people suggested multiple prover systems with quantum uh agents and uh uh also this took time even showing that quantum proof system are at least as strong as classical proof systems with multiple provers. It's not obvious because you increase both the power of the prover and of the verifier. They are both becoming quantum and it's not obvious at least that this inclusion this took time. Do &gt;&gt; you have to do that? Could you only make the verifier? &gt;&gt; You can make the verifier. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; But for some more Yeah. No, no, it will not make a lot of sense if Well, I don't know. Yeah, you could do that and I guess it was done, but the it's natural to make them all quantum. uh and then you know people believed that you know soon you will get like in the Singapore case you'll get equality but in fact uh several years later uh these guys proved that you can do much more than in classical not yeah classical multiprover systems even doubly exponential time problems can be proved to an efficient verifier in this model and uh then it was not clear where it's going to stop and it stopped in an amazing place. it stopped where uh this paper shows that anything in the class re so I remind you anything that you know this class of undecidable problems problems that are reducible to uh the holding problem of touring machine or to the solution to the front equations uh can be proved to an efficient verifier and this at this point looked really bizar are and this was maybe a point telling this complexity theorist that they've gone berserk and they generalize their proof systems to get proof to do something that's completely unreasonable proof undecidable uh things and uh yeah maybe the uh sandbox we build for ourselves is ridiculous. So it was maybe even more shocking although this was already understood by the time this proof came about that it's much more real and much more important than mathemat to mathematics to classical mathematics and physics than you would think. This result gave counter examples to major conjectures in math and physics. It uh resolve this uh serious problem. This has to do with the notions of measurements that I'm not going to get but anyway resolve the major question in quantum information theory is gave a counter example to the cons embedding conjecture this conjecture in forman algebraas and in group theory and by now we know more so somehow this model is not as ridiculous as you might think it connects to real uh you know important problems in these fields. So I want to talk with the last five minutes. I'm blaming Dennis for asking me many problems many questions at the beginning. I'll take a few minutes uh more just to tell you a little bit about you know how how this all fits with some things you you may know or may heard about and it already started in the paper defining this class of proof systems um connecting them to I'll mention it again to well-known things in physics so let me go there so one thing to note this was already understood in the classical case that when you have two prover systems then it's enough to have one round of communication. The verifier asks one question of his prover gets one answer and then decides what to do. So you don't need the claim in fact you just want to understand what is you know what's the maximum convincing probability under the best strategy of the provers that they can convince the verifier. So the two claims has this number bigger than 2/3 maybe otherwise it's less than 1/3. So we want to understand this value is you can think of it as a game G uh defined by the verifier uh computation. The verifier is a function of these four variables. The questions and the answers should determine whether it accepts or reject. So there's some value between zero and one. The probability that it accepts. Okay. So that's a classical story that you have to think about to prover classical games and uh it turns out that it doesn't matter if you allow the two provers they are not allowed to talk but they may have access to a common random string. So maybe some limited form of communication in the quantum case is the same thing only that the two provers are now allowed to share an a quantum state and entangle state. So they can be entangled. They are not communicating directly but they can measure entangle state and you can define the same value. I mean if there's a function of the verifier what's the highest probability that quantum uh provers can convince this quantum verifier to accept and these two numbers was the basic question of what's the relationship for computer scientists as I said before the the question is how complicated computationally is it to compute or to approximate these values and we already know the answer to this question. I mentioned it before for physicists this came up the very question very same question came up a century ago. So at the institute 1935 the famous you know paper of Ein Podorski and was then EPR uh was questioning the you know validity of quantum mechanics wanted to understand whether you know quant Einstein famously didn't believe it or didn't believe it is complete so they had the same picture they didn't it didn't look like that but it looked like that right So some of you may recognize this EPR experiment. This uh salt experiment with the an event generating two for stones which are entangled going in opposite directions the speed of light. They are measured and somehow information about the value seem to propagate faster than the speed of light. That was the the you know the meaning of uh quantum mechanics being true or consequence. So they called this differently not to too IP they called this quantum no rocker game and this possibility of showing an entangle state spooky action at the distance that was Einstein's term they also called the classical one they wanted to explain this phenomena classically by local game using various hidden variables um and what they were able to These are the you know we are mentioning in the next slide what they were able to do is to show that indeed the value that you know the probability that quantum provers can convince quantum verifier it can be higher in some games in some games than the classical value. So saying it again, let me separate the physics and the computer science approaches. uh physics was motivated by understanding whether quantum mechanics is complete and uh you know they developed a variety of games uh which exhibit this really validate uh quantum mechanics variety of games where the quantum value is bigger than the classical value which this started with the famous bell inequalities and it culminated really with tests right so we know today this EPR experiment was carried without 70s and 80s and yeah it's really true u in the CS world uh you know this suggestion uh of the model MIP star already started well connecting it to EPR and also suggesting not to look at the example but to build a complexity theory in the same sense we do it for uh problems for P for NP uh you know look at all non-local games look for complete and uh amplification of uh game values and reductions between different games and using all this technology of uh PCPs and codes and it all goes into this proof which is very complicated may maybe a 200page paper and relies on a lot of uh past work on classical interactive proofs and implies the uh consequences in math and physics. I mentioned I should also mention that just a few months ago this technology so it seems to be a new technique in mathematics. So this MIP star uh people develop the you know the basic notions of it. Again, one can pro explain new proof systems if you want very bizarre ones or just build models uh for which you can have convince some verifier of statements in like undecidability uh claims and they are tailor made to disprove other conjectures in mathematics and this was recently proved. It's a conjecture in in probability theory. The aldos lines conjecture is now known to be forced by this type of techniques. Okay. So summing up uh yeah I showed you lots and lots of different proof systems and uh we saw that allowing randomness and errors and interaction lead to proof systems with very weird properties. uh I mentioned that uh you know it has practical consequences and this theory this imagining models and uh understanding them led to yeah quite a bit of uh things we use every day. uh yeah it's uh you know these are general statements about uh complexity theory and uh the way it connects with or both within fields within itself and with math and physics in in various ways uh somehow to me it's um you know shows that this methodology that we have of developing you know thinking about classifying problems and uh understanding connections between them even if we don't understand each uh is is very powerful and like yesterday if you want to read about uh this development although not the last step because it's five years old but lots of other topics in computational complexity theory this book is free on my website and uh supposed to be friendly thank Please. &gt;&gt; So I want to make sure I understand the main thing the MIP star equals re. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So concretely what does that mean? Like if I like in the halting problem if I give you a code and you have a quantum computer you can with high probability decide if it halts or not or &gt;&gt; Yes. with a with two provers. Yeah. So there are two it turns out that the verifier can be classical. It turns out the provers have to be quantum and have to be entangled. And these two provers can look at the code of the touring machine and can convince the verifier in polinomial time in the length of the code that it holds or that it doesn't hold. Yeah. &gt;&gt; There was another wasn't there yesterday. So originally for the multiple prover you were gaining it seemed like you're gaining more power by separating them. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Prisoners dilemma style. But then it almost seems like in the MIP star you allow them an entangled state. So you're almost like having a weak &gt;&gt; well it's weak interaction, right? It's weak communication. They cannot send each other anything. They can measure the the state. And actually that's a it's a good point to your question. One should wonder seeing this result how is this possible after all you know the whole problem with undecidability with this halting problem is I mean the reason is undecidable is if the machine stops we don't know when right so there's a parameter time which can be unbounded and in this system it's not clear what is unbounded because time is bounded the very this interaction happens in polomials time and the very far decides in polinomial time. So what grows and that's a good question. The answer is what grows is the dimension of the hill space in which the entanglement lives. So this can be unbounded and that's you know replaces &gt;&gt; more questions. &gt;&gt; Can you explain the idea of the &gt;&gt; Yeah. Okay. So I cannot explain quite but I will give you an analogy that will help you think about it. It's really yeah uh very bizarre. So uh here you want to somehow uh take a proof that may have a bug. You don't know how to find the bug and translate it to another proof that uh you know smears the bug everywhere. So it's it's easy to find by random sampling. Right? But this process also have to uh you know if it happens to take a correct proof produce a correct proof. So it's not allowed to store just bugs anywhere. So it's not clear how this would be done. But an analogy is a uh error correing codes. So nowicing codes I want to send you a message and there's some noise and we don't want to my message if I flip a beat uh if I say I you know I love you a bit may flip it to I don't love you and it will be a disaster. So we want the so quotes take messages like this and add redundancy to them. to make them longer. This is what happens in PCP also. In fact, PCPs use coding theory very heavily very special codes locally decodable codes. Uh but anyway it uses coding techniques to enlarge the message or enlarge the proof uh into one in which right in in erroring codes uh the encoded message can be can be hit with noise in constant fraction of locations and still you will be able to recover the correct one. So what happens in the yeah in the in this PCP encodings of proofs is that if the proof was correct then it will remain correct uh if the proof was incorrect but I'm repeating what I said an error will smear all over the place so the recovery process so in other words let me say the cons are positive if there were few errors so few you could not catch them with a random sampling then this uh this corrupted proof can be converted to a real honest to god proof right that's a contra positive if shall I say it again &gt;&gt; it doesn't help okay &gt;&gt; you said that proof relies on a very short and I I don't see &gt;&gt; no no no the message can be long is it? &gt;&gt; No, not the message. No, in our coring code, you are sending a zillion bits, but you want to distinguish between this sequence. Let's say you are sending 100 bits. You want to or a thousand bits. You want to distinguish between this message and a message in which one bit is flipped. All right? So, the distance, you know, between two legitimate messages is just one. is the error or not. If you think but after you error correct it after you add the redundancy then any two legitimate messages are encoded to sequences that are very different from each other. They differ in some constant fraction. This is analog of the arrow being smeared and it's it's really it's not just an analogy. It's really heavily used in this. Yeah. &gt;&gt; Yeah. One more question. &gt;&gt; Just make sure you understood. So, so zero knowledge proofs require the verifier to have access to randomness. &gt;&gt; Yeah. &gt;&gt; So, there's no way to have zero knowledge without with a determin. &gt;&gt; No, you can prove that. Yeah. &gt;&gt; No more question. So, well, let's thank Abby again for
