Is he more introverted dog? >> Yeah. Yeah, I think so. And kind of nervous. He has one girlfriend who he's known since he was a little puppy. The girl dog. And um he loves to play with her, but he doesn't really like any other dogs. >> Oh wow. >> He likes people. He's great with people. >> Okay. We'll put this as a teaser in the beginning of the interview and the whole interview people will be waiting for the moment when you talk about dogs and the moment will not be coming. [Music] Hi, welcome to MLab Valance. Uh, this video is part of a series of interviews with people who popularize mathematics and today our guest is Steven Stroats who works at Cornell University. He's a well-known math popularizer and the first applied mathematician on my channel. >> Yes. >> Uh, so hi Stephen, I'm very excited to have you. Hey M, great to be with you and thanks for having this great channel. You do such a nice job um helping to spread the good word about mathematicians and mathematics. So I really admire what you're doing. >> Oh, thank you very much. Oh, that's that's so nice to hear. >> And also I love the angle that you take too that we're people, you know, it's about it's about the the life of a mathematician, not just the work. >> Yeah. Okay, let's learn something about you. So uh I started learning things about you by checking out uh different sources and I found out that you work on lots of completely different applications of mathematics and in a very broad sense which is very impressive. So I wonder I was wondering how do you start working on a new area when you yeah don't know. >> Yes that's a good question because there are so many different ways. Sometimes it's a student will have a question that they're interested in and uh I really like it when my graduate students take initiative that way. So if they have some area like I had one student who wanted to do something about linguistics. I don't know anything about linguistics but she was so excited. I think it it sort of sets a good example that the the teacher can be a student too and that nobody knows everything and we're all learning all the time. So sometimes it's the student who leads us um us meaning me and the student into some new area and sometimes it's more um maybe I'll just talk to some friend of mine. You know Cornell is a in a a small town so we know each other. We see each other at the farmers market. Our kids might go to daycare together. So you become friendly with people and that's helpful for interdisciplinary work because you could then trust each other you know like you in other words you have to admit that you don't know certain things and it's embarrassing for professors to do that for anybody to do that but um when you're friends it's easier and so I I frequently like to work with my friends in computer science or biology or physics or some other area outside of math. So those would be my two recipes. you either a new area through a student or through a through a friend. >> Okay, I'm curious. What was the linguistics project? >> Well, um there have been a few. This student, Danny Abrams was his name. He's now a professor at Northwestern. Um he was he he loves languages and um he grew up speaking English, but he also learned a lot of Spanish. He grew up in Texas and so he went to a Spanish class at Cornell to keep improving his Spanish. But right before that class, there was another class in the um language of the indigenous people of Peru and Ecuador called Ketwa. And the Ketwa professor saw him coming into the class and said, "Oh, you like languages? Maybe come to my Ketwa class. You would like that." And Danny Abrams being Danny Abrams, he said, "Okay." So then he started learning Ketwa and it got him interested in this problem that that language is on the verge of death because Spanish is a much higher status language in that part of the world that parents want their kids to learn Spanish because of economic opportunities and other opportunities generally. So, so it's really difficult and a lot of times kids can't even speak with their grandparents because they don't know the language of their tradition. So, Danny got interested in this question of how do languages change as a function of time in the number of their speakers and could that be tracked sort of like a population biologist would track a a dying population. M >> so he used methods of population biology but he also was the kind of brave student who would put on his backpack and go to South America and he just hiked around and slept in you know hostels or sometimes in parks and he tried he had came up with this strategy where he interviewed Catholic priests to ask them when was the last time they gave the Catholic mass in Ketwa >> as a way of measuring because there's no data about this you have to find an inventive way of collecting statistics >> and so he used that as a kind of rough measure over a function as a function of time how many years ago was it that the last service was in in Ketwa anyway >> so from this kind of thing he collected data also library work and whatever but we ended up writing a paper that got published in nature magazine about um modeling the the decline of languages with dynamical systems methods, you know, sort of the type that population biologists use. But so we were solving a differential equation >> um and then fitting parameters to the data that Danny had either collected or recorded in libraries and it became a somewhat um early paper in that field of the modeling of language death. It's now been I don't know cited many hundreds of times I suppose. >> Oh wow. It became a big big thing and it's just because there was this very smart adventurous graduate student and I let him do his thing because that's my my philosophy as a teacher. If you have such a student, let them do what they want to do and and try to help them shape it into something that's going to be >> high impact and well written and you know of course good math with interesting modeling assumptions. So actually in that paper we we took an extremely simplified approach where um we just thought about the language number of speakers as a function of time but um in competition with some other language in this case Spanish and um we made certain symmetry assumptions I mean there were certain very simplifying things that we tried to do because there's no basic knowledge of what the laws are of language dynamics, you know, we just we're making them up based on simple considerations of symmetry and smoothness and some other things. >> Oh, actually I wanted to ask you about this. So, um I heard that you said in the night science podcast that biology is not always following the rules of beauty. >> So, I think your example was that human eye is not perfectly beautiful in its structure as I understood. Uh, however, math is like one of the main principles of ma doing math is like trying to find the beautiful answer or picture. And uh, I mean, you talked about this, but I'm still curious like how does science find a balance um, between these? >> That's a really tricky point because the ultimate test for science is supposed to be matching to experimental data or observations or other facts about the world. You could say beauty has nothing to do with it at all. it's just about data. And yet, uh, you know, like in the example I just gave about language decline, we did use criteria that mathematicians would care about of simplicity that we wanted to look at the simplest model that contained the essential difficulty. Um, and so we did make certain assumptions that you could regard as a kind of imposition of of a demand for beauty or simplicity or economy. >> In other words, we we tr there was so much that we didn't know that we >> you know, we could make a model with many unknown parameters, but then there sort of too much flexibility. It's hard to say anything interesting. So, so you like to sort of constrain yourself like beauty or simplicity or symmetry or other criteria of minimalism. That's my own personal taste. I like things that are extremely minimal at the cost of being unrealistic. You know, other applied mathematicians would go the other way. If they really care about the application >> a lot, they would do whatever is necessary to to get a good fit to data. and they might have a very ugly model with lots of parameters and they don't mind that because they can fit anything. But it's hard to make sharp statements and also to make statements that are testable or refutable. Right? In the philosophy of science, we're trying to make scientific models that can be disproven so that progress can occur and you can move on to a better model. If your model is too flexible, has too many possibilities, you never really know if it's right or wrong because you could always >> change it a little. >> It's better if it's more rigid. >> Uhhuh. >> In terms of making progress, I don't know. That was the way I was brought up. >> So to choose less parameters. >> Yeah. If you have fewer parameters, you have fewer choices and you can be proven wrong. It's this funny thing. Most people think you're trying to prove yourself right. But but in but in in science there is this concept that goes back to Carl Pauper, the philosopher of science, that what makes science different from other parts of human thinking is not that it can be proven correct but that it can be proven wrong that that it can be refutable. If you make a statement that sticks its neck out and and there is some test which can prove it wrong that's good. because because you've then really said something. I mean, that's brave, right? If you have something that's so amorphous and vague that no one can ever prove you wrong because you could always make some adjustment in Poppers thinking that's not productive. I mean at the time he was a young man uh or relatively young and he was comparing Freudian psychology um Darwin's theory in evolution and relativity in Einstein's work and he felt that that relativity was very different than the other two because relativity made certain strong predictions and if the behavior of Mercury didn't you know the the properties of Mercury's orbit didn't obey say Einstein's math, then the theory was wrong. Whereas with Freudian psychology, no matter what was happening, the advocates could always find some explanation in Freudian terms. And so they thought that was a triumph that the theory was so powerful it could explain everything, but Popper thought it was a weakness because the theory could never be falsified. It was it it made no real strong statements. I watched this um series called >> maybe couples therapy. >> Yeah, couples therapy. So yeah, which is films in New York where the real psychoanalysis session and I thought I mean I liked watching it because I think >> there they there were many interesting moments. However, I was impressed how like psychoanalysis can explain the opposite behaviors by the same reason. Like if a person let's say a person had had was abused in childhood then if this person is overreacting in conflicts then it's because they were abused in childhood but if they're underreacting it's because you know they had to suppress their emotions because so like any non not easy childhood can explain anything and no despite that I I did like the series I think >> I agree and I also like it very much >> many interesting things can one see in that series however this this like way that like that everything can explain everything is >> well I think yes exactly I think that's a nice example that um it's it's the explanatory power of these things is it's really a difficult challenge in psychology because people are so complicated and you know I'm not sure that she's wrong a childhood may explain things in contradictory directions but it does make it hard to test the theory when It's that adaptable. >> I think I think I think everything could be right what she was saying. But I was amused that she does not notice that she uses opposite implications from the same. >> So interesting. Well, see this is what happens when a mathematician watches television. She may notice contradictions. [Laughter] >> Stephen, I was actually curious. It's a bit of a random question, but I saw on your web page that you studied the dynamics of the human sleepwake cycle. Can you tell a bit about it? What >> of course? Yes, I'd be delighted to that that was my PhD thesis was about sleep and wake especially under very strange conditions where there was a lot of data where in the 1960s at the time when um we were starting to put people into outer space you know both in the Soviet Union and United States they had space missions ultimately going to the moon and bringing the astronauts back and a big question was what would happen to people when they didn't live in a 24-hour world anymore. A cycle of light and dark and sunrise and sunset, you know, like what would it be like to be an astronaut in a space capsule? That was one question. And so experiments were done where people were deprived of the normal signals of sunlight and darkness. They just lived in a at first the experiments were done in caves. They would put someone in a cave deep underground and they might live there for six months by themselves. Really tough conditions, you know, with animals like rats and bats and very cold temperatures. These were very brave volunteers who did these. Sometimes the scientists themselves were the volunteers and they would go into these caves. Later it became more civilized and they would put people in special buildings or rooms that had no windows, no clocks. Nobody would come in and tell them what time it was. So they could live for weeks or months without knowing what time it was and then they would watch the the experimenters would watch what happened to their biological rhythms, their hormone rhythms, their body temperature, their sleep cycle. um what would we do if we didn't if we weren't periodically driven by sunlight and darkness? And so I had access to a lot of data about that kind of thing. But okay, those are really artificial conditions. Um but they do tell us a lot about how people sleep in in the real world. So we could talk about different aspects of that if you want. I mean should should I tell you some >> what's the most surprising thing you >> Yeah, the most surprising thing. Good. That's a good question. The most surprising thing is that there are certain times in your body's biological cycle, the so-called circadian cycle, where it's really hard to fall asleep. In other words, there's a kind of forbidden zone where even if you're tired, you probably can't fall asleep. So, let me try to explain a little what I'm saying. The the circadian cycle is not a familiar thing to most people. They don't wouldn't really know what I'm talking about. Okay, we have this sleepwake cycle. We sleep every day typically usually around seven, eight hours, six hours. Okay, that's one rhythm. The sleep and wake cycle. But inside your body, there are rhythms that you're not so aware of, but they're there. Your body temperature, for example, is not constant. It's not always the same temperature inside your body, deep in your body. If you measure a person's deep body temperature as a function of time in constant conditions where they're just lying there all day long, you see a really nice sine wave of temperature. >> Oh wow. >> Yeah. It's not a flat temp. Your body temperature goes up and down with a certain cycle and it will do that for day after day and you see this really clean body temperature rhythm and it's because your body is filled with biological oscillators. Your brain in the hypothalamus of the brain has this natural clock that generates an approximately 24-hour rhythm. Even if you didn't know anything, I mean, this is kind of fantastic to people who never heard this. We grew up on a planet with a 24-hour cycle, right? The Earth spins on its axis every 24 hours. That is built into our biology. Our cells know that we grew up on this planet. And so even if you live in a way that factors out the 24-hour rhythm of the world, your body still remembers it from billions of years ago. It's in every creature on Earth that I mean every everything from uh the simplest >> all of all of >> all living things have this >> all live this you see maybe you don't know this. This is a really wonderful subject. This is called circadian biology. >> I thought it's a human thing actually. No, even bacteria I think might have it. They they may not. Bacteria might be the only creatures that don't have very good circadian clocks. And I think even they might. I haven't been in the subject for 40 years. I mean, I did it as a graduate student, but back then we used to say bacteria didn't have circadian clocks, but everything else does. Um, single-sellled organisms like you don't need a whole body. One cell, one cell does this. is a little my dog is busy licking my hand here. Maybe I could take a picture of him. Is he down here? You see him? >> Yeah. Show him. Hello. Hello. >> Introverted dog. We left. >> Yeah. Murray. Murray is his name. He wants some attention. >> But so the the statement that I wanted to make was that there's a certain phase in this underlying cycle where if you try to go to sleep, you'll find it almost impossible. It's it's about 8 hours before this time of um minimum body temperature. So if you woke up every day at 7, your minimum body temperature would be at about 4 in the morning and 8 hours before that would be about 6:00 wait 8 o'clock at night. Yeah. So 8:00 at night, according to what I'm saying, should be a difficult time for a person to fall asleep if they normally wake up at 7 in the morning. And so where you might have experienced this is if you have to get up early for a flight to a country somewhere far away and you have to get to the airport early. So you think, I'm going to go to bed early, but you can't you can't fall asleep. >> You you've had this experience, right? >> I never try. I know it was not going to work. it doesn't work and that's because you're trying to fall asleep in this time of maximum uh resistance to falling asleep. So anyway, that that was surprising to me, but it came out in the data. So that was that's what my PhD was about. But it >> in some ways it was the most interesting work I ever did for the average person to hear about because everyone sleeps and we're all interested in our own bodies. But it had the least math of anything I ever did. It was it was it was kind of frustrating because I wanted to be a math professor and here I was doing my PhD in some area that was scientifically very interesting but was not giving me the tools I needed to become a good mathematician. And I was worried about it because I thought who's going to hire me? I don't want to work in a department of sleep. I'm not a sleep you know not a not a sleep scientist. No, really culture is important, right? You go to go through grad school, you get to meet people in some field. You go to conferences, they start to know your name. >> That's your natural trajectory. So, I was all set up to become a sleep researcher. Which I had no intention of doing. And I remember my mother was really surprised because she said, "What? I thought you like math. What are you doing studying sleep? Why are you doing that?" It was a good question. But there were really interesting math problems involved in modeling the sleepwake cycle but they weren't mathematically very deep. They were pretty elementary and very statistical a lot of data. So so I I had to do something else for my posttock you know to try to get stronger. >> Yeah. >> Because uh I mean you look so confident as a researcher. So I was curious which kind of struggles or I don't know maybe insecurities you had and not I heard about the story of your first year of undergrad. This I remember when no one motivated mathematics for you. This I remember but maybe later on in your research career >> many times. Yeah. >> Yeah. I don't have any more uh great confidence than anybody else. I don't think I I mean I certainly had some struggles. That was one this question of here I am. I go through graduate school. I take a lot of courses in biology and biopysics because I think at that time in my life I think my space is going to be applying math to biology. It wasn't a very popular thing to do at the time there. Everyone knew that math had applications, but most mostly it was applied in engineering or computer science or or physics or something. But math in the softer subjects like biology or even social science um or linguistics, you know, any of those areas that felt like not overpop populated, like there would be more room for for someone to do something new. And so I also I was interested in them. I like all different subjects. I mean I really like so many different things to learn about. So so I really thought okay I got to be a math biologist and I need to learn some biology. But I ended up not really doing that much math in graduate school. And I >> how did you deal? >> Well yeah it's been a problem for me my whole life including really yes I would say. So, I always feel very insecure about um how little math I know. Now, probably everybody has their own insecurities, but I, you know, when I hear my colleagues in the math department I'm in now and they start talking about group representation theory, I feel like, well, I don't really know what that is, you know? I mean, I sort I know what group theory is. I was never very good at it. I don't really understand what representation theory is. I understand that there you know you could treat you could think of groups as if they were matrix groups and that somehow that's helpful. But I don't really get it because I never studied graduate level math except in applied math I did. So if it's about differential equations I'm secure. But outside of that, you know, anything in number theory or topology or serious analysis, rigorous analysis, I have like an undergraduate level understanding. And I wasn't even that good as an undergraduate. I, you know, in pure math, there were a lot of better students. So, I've always been insecure about that, but I figure everybody has their own problems. So, you know, >> would you like to learn that kind of >> Yes, I love that stuff. I love it when I get to teach it. It's so it's so fun. >> Let's say someone, your colleague is talking about some abstract math that you don't understand. Uh what do you wish they did better? >> Great. Yeah, that comes up all the time because I don't tend to go to our department colloquia for that reason that I I go for a few minutes and then I I get lost so quickly that um I just leave. It it irritates me to be in a talk that I can't understand. Now partly it's for the reason I said that I don't have a proper background through the accidents of my own history that I didn't learn what is common knowledge to my colleagues I think because I didn't come up in the same culture. So that's my problem. Um but even within that I still feel like I should be able to understand more than I do and I blame some of that on the speaker. >> Um >> so what do you think wish they did better? Yeah. Well, what tends to help is if you can give the audience a question that is a a uh motivating question for the subject. The way I often phrase it is um if you can help the reader, if you're writing, if you help the reader or the listener love the question, the the first goal is that they should understand the question, then that's already hard. But the second is if they could love the question and see wow that is a really cool question. I wonder how that you know what have people discovered about that or how how would they approach that question? But you have to first now by the way this emphasis on the question is um already not standard. Most speakers, as you know, will state the question pretty quickly and then spend the rest of the time talking about the solution or the answer. And that is, I think, a big mistake because the the listener doesn't care. Why do I care? I mean, that stuff is hard. The answer is going to be hard. So, I don't care about that. And I'm now I'm lost and I I feel annoyed. And I also don't understand what we're doing. like why are we talking about this? Because I haven't been properly set up to understand and appreciate and ideally love the question. So I I would much rather a talk spend half the talk on on the question and so that means many things. It could be the history of the question. Who worked on it? Where did it first come up? Why is it important? How does it connect to other parts of math? How does it connect to other parts of science? How does it connect to society? I mean, okay, if it's really pure, like if it's algebraic K theory, it may not connect to society, but it certainly connects to other parts of math. So like if you told me people doing category theory saw this thing or people doing algebraic geometry saw that thing and like there was this certain shared phenomenon and people realized there was something more general happening and so they invented K theory. I don't know I'm making this up because I don't know what K theory is but if it was some kind of story like that I would be interested. Do you think for any question one can come up with an like entertaining story? >> Yeah, because there was a reason that people got fascinated by that question. There was, right? I mean, you could tell me. >> I have to tell you bad news that sometimes people talk about a question just because they found an answer, not because of course everyone wanted to know the answer. Okay, now that's a really good point because we have to remember that these talks that we all listen to are embedded in a culture where people are trying to get jobs or trying to improve their position, trying to get their reputation enhanced, impress the experts, you know, move to a different institution that they would prefer, you know, I mean, there's a lot of reasons people are giving talks besides pure scholar scholarly reasons. And that's fine. That's that's the reality. That's the we live in that world. So I I'm not criticizing anyone for doing that. But it can be um a conflict. That is the thing that you do to try to impress the listener might be different than the thing you do to help the listener understand. I mean, think how often we talk about results being trivial, right? That's our big put down that such and such a result is trivial. And you know that's always a bad thing when when someone says that because to a person who doesn't understand it's not trivial and then being told it's trivial is just further insult. So I really wish we would stop doing that because so much of math is wonderful all the way down to the most childish thing. You know there's nothing trivial. I mean yes you could bore people by what the the reason that the the concept of triviality exists is you don't want to bore the listener and you don't want to insult them like if they already understand something don't waste time on that. So you it is a matter of empathy like do you understand who you're talking to and are you um connecting with them at the level that they're at. If you're too low or too high there's a problem. So that's what people are trying to do when they say something is trivial. It's like a shared understanding that we're not going to waste time on that. I know you're at a different level, so I'm going to try to meet you where you are. So I guess it comes from a good heart, a good a good impulse, but sometimes it comes from a bad impulse to just show off like this stuff is trivial because I'm so smart. That if it comes from vanity, that's not helpful. I think as you said it would be nice if it would be symmetric like trying to go not too high and not too low. However, I think people are more afraid to say something trivial than they're afraid to explain something which I there's a big asymmetry. >> That's the big that big asymmetry is a big part of the communication problem. I I'm glad we're talking about this because I do feel communication from one mathematician to another is a subject that we don't think about enough. What like people associate me these days with math communication. I've been very devoted to that now for some well really my whole career but especially the past 20 years or so. And it's usually understood to mean communication from mathematicians to the public, which is yes, a big part of it. But there's other parts. There's communication of mathematicians to other scientists in adjacent fields to math and there's communication within math, of mathematicians to each other. And we really spend very little time on that. Um, and I think it's a very sick part of our culture actually. >> But how would you suggest to to do things better or how do you try to do things? I >> I really wish we could think about it as a as a group and take it seriously because I think we're wasting a lot of people's time. Um, I think for example, most colloquia are not genuine colloquia as opposed to a seminar, right? A seminar is for experts, people really in some specialized area. That's one thing. But a colloquium is supposed to be for the whole department. And so when someone talks about graph theory and someone else is listening who's, you know, in numerical analysis or some field that's not graph theory, there's a gulf. They have to try to bridge that gulf. and a and a really good colloquium is for everyone to show the beauty and the collective unity of of math and the math is integrated. It's one great web of ideas. So that's what we're there to celebrate and we almost never do. We usually just talk to the one other expert in the department that invited us to give the colloquium and everybody and then and then the really sick part is everybody just sits there like okay this is another talk I don't understand but I'm going to try to get something out of it by just listening like I'll hear some words and I'll math is difficult and I'll learn something okay I just think we could do a lot better than that because I've heard speakers that uh really make an effort to explain what the subject is about, why it's interesting, how it connects to other things and then you know they try to go into some depth about what the question was and even what the solution was that they want to discuss. That's fine but but it takes effort to do that kind of talk. You have to think a lot about the audience and you have to do what you're discussing about the asymmetry. You have to be willing to go into this zone that people are worried is too trivial. It's not too trivial. It's it's actually kind. It's friendly. And and the thing is mathematicians are perfectly good at this. If they're talking to each other one- on- one, like if suppose you and I were just sitting together and I said, "I don't know anything about K theory." You could explain it to me. I'm sure just the two of us. you would figure out what I know, what I don't know, and you would you would make adjustments and you would give me a lot that I don't currently have, and I would be grateful. The thing that we have trouble with is when it's one to many, when it's one person talking to a group or one person writing a paper. I mean, that's the other thing. Our culture of writing is so messed up. If you look at the way the papers begin, almost always with no real introduction, just getting right into it, that's a mistake. And and that's not historically the way it was. If you look at any work by Oiler, you know, or any of the great masters of the past and not even ancient people, like if you look at old papers by there's a probability theorist named Mark Kac his papers are really beautiful and very friendly. He gives you a whole introduction that explains the setup and why it's interesting and then he gives you real theorems and proofs later, but he he makes it interesting for everybody at first. And um there's just some kind of nasty culture that I don't know who to blame it on, whether it's Burbach or Gaus or somebody who decided it has to be very brief. That being concise is the aesthetic we're going for. We want to be really brief. I mean interesting good counter example is Terry Tao. If you look at Terry Tao's blog he's super friendly and he seems to think a lot about the audience. He writes for everybody. He also writes for specialists. You know he'll show you his latest work. So if you want to see what he's thinking about he explains that. But he also writes very generally like to students. I mean, he seems to be exercising himself all across the spectrum of communication from the most elementary to the most advanced. And it's incredibly generous for one of the world's great mathematicians to do that. So, I wish we would follow his example and try to do more of that, adjust our level to the audience. >> But how do you think one could change realistically this writing uh culture? >> Well, we don't have a good feedback loop right now. we allow people to do this current system. Nobody's complaining. >> You know, I I feel sort of embarrassed to be complaining about it, especially because of my earlier insecurity that I mentioned that you could say like, okay, when I when I sit there feeling unhappy in the colloquium, I wonder, am I the only one that's unhappy? Maybe it's my my poor background that's causing the problem and everybody else understands. But I don't think that's true. And when I've talked to some colleagues who are honest and willing to be vulnerable, they say that they don't understand either, but they don't expect to understand. So I do think it's a yes, I have my own problems, but I do think it's broader than my problems. Um, so I but because we don't complain, it just keeps going. Okay, that's one argument that we're not doing enough punishment. We're not doing enough complaining. But the other argument could be we're not doing enough rewarding, >> right? They talk about the carrot and the stick. >> Yeah. >> So we we're not using the stick, >> but we're also not using the carrot. What if we what if we um really somehow praised or complimented people who genuinely gave good colloquia or good talks that were broad? Like we always say, make the talk accessible to the graduate students. >> Very few people do. But if we if we somehow could reward them and point out how great it was what they did. As another example that it's not just a matter of how difficult our subject is. Go to any physics colloquium. Okay. So the physicists have a different culture than the mathematicians. If you if you read a physics paper, it has a good introduction, a real introduction. And if you also um go to their colloquia, a particle theorist is talking in a way that an astrophysicist can understand or a condensed matter experimentalist or whatever. They talk to each other. They they don't make the mistake that we make. So I don't think we need it. I think it's some sick thing that we need to get rid of. >> I wanted to ask you, I noticed before that you had strong opinions. Uh, and I wonder if you ever had to like if you had a ever to pay a price for it and or if you would recommend your colleagues to also share their controversial opinions or this is not such a good idea for them. >> I do I suppose I do have strong opinions. Yes. Um, what the question was has that gotten me into trouble? Was that or Yeah. >> Yes. Yes. And if you would recommend others to to be more vocal >> I don't know what I would recommend. I think I would recommend people should try to be true to themselves if they're very reasonable, modest, measured person. >> That's a good way to be. Like my colleague John Genheimr, um, now retired. I I never really heard him say any critical mean thing about anything ever. He's so mild and pleasant and reasonable and accurate. He doesn't exaggerate. He's just very um objective and I can't imagine it him getting angry or me ever getting angry at him. Whereas a different colleague, John Hubard is so extreme and exaggerates so much and is so theatrical. I personally find Hubard much easier to learn from because he's so clear. He's so ridiculous. Like you can't miss what he's saying. He's so extreme. Um, and he can be really mean and nasty and but he's he's mean and nasty to everybody, including himself. He's kind of funny like he's almost a performance artist. He's so absurd, but he's also a great mathematician and sees connections and knows many I mean both of them are great mathematicians. The two Johns, they're about the same age. Um, and they really knew each other and they worked in similar areas in dynamical systems, both very accomplished, but they were really at opposite ends of, you know, this sort of stylistic spectrum. So, I don't know. Uh, I always, like I say, I found Hubard easier to learn from because, um, he really stuck his neck out and made strong statements and I found him very clear. Whereas with Guggenheimimer, I had to listen very carefully to try to understand what is he really saying because it was so accurate, you know, like you could easily see what's wrong with what Hubard is saying. And that was stimulating. I don't know. So that's a matter of taste. Um Hubard was not afraid to be wrong. He was wrong a lot in public, whereas I don't think I ever saw Genheimr ever say anything wrong about anything. Um, [Laughter] so I don't know. My point was that they have different personalities and I think both of them were true to themselves. So people I think should just be themselves and if you're going to be um a hubard, be a hubard and if you're a Guggenheimimer, be a Genheimr. I don't know. That's my own feeling. But I guess my lesson if anyone's looking for lessons or advice is um if something is not working you should probably stop doing it. You know like in sports they have this philosophy that if your strategy is not working change your strategy. You know if the game is not going well do something different. And other people will tell you no that's you're being a quitter if you do that. You got to keep working until you get it to work. You know don't give up. But I don't believe in that. I I actually believe in giving up strategically because everything that you're doing means you're not doing something else. And there are a lot of good things to do. And if something is, you know, after trying reasonably hard, if it's not working well, try something else. I I just that's been always my attitude. >> I'd like to ask you about this because this sounds very reasonable and I love that. But we also know all these stories of mathematicians who you know thought for 10 years about a problem and then they proved it and then they got blah blah blah. >> Right. Right. >> Exactly. >> It's not just a a narrative but it's also these are true stories. >> They're true stories. Right. One has to think about oneself. Some people who are really stubborn and tenacious are well suited to thinking about something for a long time and not giving up. And sometimes they produce marvelous breakthroughs and um that is great. And it's true that um nothing important happens without hard work. So you don't want to give up too easily. I'm not advocating. >> So how okay how does okay this is not easy to decide when to >> I don't know I don't know how to answer this question. >> This is a judgment. This is what what makes somebody an effective researcher or or not. You have to have judgment. If you give up too early, you'll never do anything interesting. If you give up too late, you will have spent your whole time on an impossible problem. And again, you haven't done anything good. >> But okay, you have kids. So, if your kid would ask like whether it's time or not to give up on something not working, how would you what would you tell them? Well, I guess I would think about a few considerations. How do you feel during the struggle? If you're making a little progress, you know, you haven't done you haven't accomplish what you want, but there's signs of hope. You're you're still making some progress or you're you're learning better what doesn't work, you know, like that's progress, too. You're eliminating certain possible avenues. That's progress. If there's some indication of some kind of progress, then it's not time to give up yet. But or there's also the question of the emotional side. How do you feel about all this? Are you really really suffering or or do you feel like a pleasant sense of frustration? So I could give you an example. I had a problem in my own childhood as a high school student. You know, we haven't talked about the question, how did I get into math? So, in high school, I had a question that a teacher gave the whole class, >> a geometry problem. I've talked about to many other interviewers, so you may have heard it, so I won't go into the details of it, >> but the point was it was a geometry question >> and and I couldn't solve it. And the teacher said he didn't know how to do it. And that was very motivating to me because I respected this teacher a lot. And so I thought about the problem and I felt like I should be able to do this problem and and I thought about it for about six months and I thought about it all the time all day long in the shower walking around playing basketball in French class was always thinking about this stupid problem and and I kept making progress because I would try doing it with trigonometry and and I almost got it but then I couldn't solve some equation that came out after I applied the law of science to this triangle problem. So I made progress up to a point and then I got stuck. Then I tried other constructive proofs like they almost worked but they didn't. You know like I kept trying things and I kept doing stuff for months and months and eventually I got something that worked. And so it really felt fantastic, right? It's one of those things that makes us love math that you try for a long time and then you get it and it's very exciting. Um so that shows I didn't give up quickly. I was stubborn. But then I after that I started making up problems for myself because I wanted to have that feeling again. And I made up questions that were in the category of I I call them chase problems. It was always about a particle moving in a certain way and some other particle chasing it by always aiming directly at it. And then you know as the one thing is moving away the other thing is changing its direction. And so like you could picture a dog chasing a rabbit or something like that. And so there were rules for the motion of the target and then motion of the thing that's pursuing. And so it was this tricky system of differential equations. And they were not the ones I had been taught in my textbook. And so I made up one really simple question which was the rabbit is just going around at uniform velocity around a circle and the dog starts at the center of the circle and aims directly towards wherever the rabbit is. And then as the rabbit moves the dog keeps changing its direction and it keeps getting closer and closer. And I could see in my mind that the the dog is going to spiral out and asmtoically approach the circle. And then you could make an assumption about the two speeds, what's the ratio of the two speeds. And you know, if the dog is slower than the rabbit, it's never going to catch the rabbit. If it's faster than the rabbit, it seems like it will, of course, catch the rabbit. And if it's at the same speed, it seems like it will asmtoically approach the rabbit. And that was the question I was interested in. Could I calculate the equation of this spiral that asmmptotes to a circle? seems like it's a standard parametric equation type of problem and I I had learned about spirals in pre-calculus but I had never seen a spiral that asmtoted to a circle and I felt like I could write down equations that would have that property but were they the solution to this differential equation and none of them worked and um I thought about that one for a very long time and I could never get it and eventually I gave gave up. And it turns out you can't do it. I mean, I didn't know that. I I was very naive. I didn't realize at the time that nonlinear differential equations often don't have closed form solutions in terms of the elementary functions that you learn about in high school. >> It didn't it didn't occur to me, but I inadvertently picked a problem that has no simple closed form solution. So, of course, I got stuck. But um >> but I got very far on it and it was still interesting and I didn't hate being stuck. It felt good. I mean it didn't feel good to be stuck but I didn't mind this the the the the re I was doing research. I didn't realize it but this was the feeling of doing research. So why did I know when to stop? I don't know. At some point I just couldn't think of anything else to do. So I I don't have a general algorithm for when to give up, but if you're really not making progress and you're not enjoying it anymore, I think that's a good time to give up. But it's a really serious problem because as a graduate student adviser, you're giving students problems all the time and they're getting stuck all the time and you feel some responsibility that they they do have to graduate in a reasonable amount of time. So what advice do you give them when it's time to switch the problem especially if they've invested years in their problem? You don't want to say give up. >> So that's >> you give students problems you don't know you don't have a vague idea how to solve. >> Those are the only ones I give really. I don't I don't have much patience for exercises where I know that they can do it. Some adviserss do that right. I have good colleagues who give their students problems that they know they could solve, but they're they give it as like >> it's sort of like a bird, you know, where the mama bird eats the food and then gives it to the baby bird to eat it. That's what I feel like. These advisers are pre-chewing the food and then they give it to the baby to be like, "Okay, now you do it." And and that may be a good strategy for teaching people how to solve technically how to solve problems, like to develop technique, but I I really feel like the heart of graduate school education is more than that. It's how to pick a problem. How to pick a problem that may be tractable even though you don't know how to do it. and that's at the right level for you that would be interesting for your community. You know, these are these are the real skills that make a great researcher. And I I worry that my colleagues approach that his students never learn the best the most important thing. They're just really staying at undergraduate level and they never have they don't learn what it really means to be imaginative. So I don't let my students do that. Usually I I try to do the real thing with them which is scary because sometimes they do get stuck and then we have to switch the problem. So I don't claim that my method is great. It's high risk and I I often discuss that with the student ahead of time. I mean there some adviserss pref suggest a graded approach where the first problem I mean in fact this colleague of mine who I really love and respect he he does the first problem with the student actually they do it together which in practice means that the adviser does it but the student sort of watches the problem getting solved and participates. The second problem is a tractable problem that the the adviser suggests but they keep their hands off it and the student does that one. And then the third problem the student invents the problem and tries to do it him or herself. So that's a very gentle that's like swimming lessons, right? First I'm going to let you swim and I'm going to hold your belly and you're not going to drown or take in too much water. Then I'm gonna let go now that you can swim. No, really. It's a very nice way to teach. Very gentle. >> Stephen, in my field, first year we just spent reading. >> There's also that all this learning, right? You need to learn so much. Yeah. I see. So, did you not have much experience of the type I'm describing with these different advising styles? >> Oh, I think I was very lucky that I was the um the how did you say bird mouth this kind of thing. >> Yeah. So I think I I felt very grateful that I was given a problem not by my adviser before I came to do PhD. I was given a problem which had an expected answer and it's not like it was obvious how to get there but it was to an expert it was clear that it's doable. The answer was expected and the path there was okay. Not maybe not obvious path but >> I think an expert could have figured it out. It's not not uh how is it called? Not rocket science. >> Yeah. So but then I was when I was doing my PhD my actually my PhD advisor did not give concrete problems to students. So he had this non-bird approach where he would like he was always happy to talk about a math area but he did not want to give a specific problem. He wanted a student to find their problem themselves which would be more of a research as you're saying. >> So it sounds like my PhD buddies would have a more scientifically better time. However, I think I felt more secure. And this allowed me to actually spend most of my PhD time working on uh collaborative projects with other friends of mine which had nothing to do with my PhD project. Okay. Because my PhD project was rather expectableish solvable. >> Uhhuh. >> So, so I was happy to be given this food so so that I could, you know, hang out with other birdies and >> really our own games. No. So you're saying your PhD project was this thing that was expected to be solvable but had some technical difficulty getting there. >> Well, yeah. Okay. Maybe I'm too shy, but I don't even want to say that there were any technical difficulties. >> Not even that. Okay. >> Okay. Okay. Look, I'm not the most >> not the most objective judge. >> Not the most objective judge, but let's say definitely knowing what the answer should be helps. So, >> it does. Yeah. Um, >> and do you think that was an appropriate PhD problem? >> Yeah. Yeah. I I'm very happy with the way it worked out. >> Okay. Because it was >> because I could I mean the best part was you know collaboration projects with my friends, >> right? >> So did did those collaborations lead to other papers? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This was the fun. Yes. My my yum my friends are amazing mathematicians and uh they slash we wrote a bunch of cool papers I mean I was the younger one and I was so happy to learn from them. >> So you really had a very good experience it sounds like. >> Yeah. Yeah. It was amazing. >> Do you think your adviser expected it would work like this that you would have this thing that was your own problem and then you would collaborate with other people your own age? my adviser. So, my PhD adviser is uh I did an interview with him. He think he's the the kindest person out of all out of all of us. Um out of all math people and um >> he he has I think he has no expectations but also doesn't impose any expectations. So, he's always happy. You can come to his office always and he's always happy to talk about any math question whatsoever. He's like just open to think about any math question you ask him. >> Always any. And so with that amazing service, but he doesn't tell you what to do and he doesn't he doesn't want to put discipline on. >> Yeah. >> I remember it was a very funny story. >> One of my PhD siblings came to my adviser and said that his uh job contract is ending, meaning that he has to get it, you know, uh prolonged. >> So, so he he came to his adviser and says uh that his job contract is ending. And Mark looks back and says, "Oh, but why? Yeah, I'm really sorry for everyone who can't be my advisor's student. >> Are you good? Can you tell who it is? Mark who? >> Yeah, Mark Leavine. I don't know if you know him. >> Mark Lavine. >> He Yeah, he was at Northeastern >> and then he moved to Germany. He's in essence. >> He sounds great. >> Yeah. >> Sounds like such a good guy. >> Yeah. >> Okay. I need to look him up. >> Sure is. >> Yeah. >> He's from Detroit and he loves recommending Detroit to everyone. I see. Well, you speak very affectionately of him. He sounds wonderful. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Well, you know, in Essen there were not so many other Essen is a city in Germany which was destroyed completely during the war and rebuilt very quickly into like gray boxes of houses. >> So there was not much joy except for talking to my adviser which was totally worth being in essence. I heard saw that there is a prize named uh Steven Strobert's prize. Yes, it's exciting. So, it's a prize for high school students for uh so you can submit you being a high school student. You uh can submit any piece of math popularization like communicating math and then someone I don't know if it's you or not evaluates them. >> I I'm I have been on the judging staff I or committee. I hope in the future we'll have other people too. I mean we have right now four. >> How do you choose how do you choose? Okay, first of all amazing idea but how do you choose what is better? We we don't I mean we have three criteria that we advertise um content, >> creativity and communication. So what is the what is the piece of work about? I say it vaguely like that piece of work because it could be writing, it could be a poem, it could be a performance. >> You know, some students have submitted dance videos of themselves dancing >> showing different either transformations or symmetries or whatever. Um it could be you know like so there's a lot of different media that can be used could be sculpture could be a poem whatever um so we we care about what is the mathematical content being expressed how creative is the execution of whatever the idea is and how effective is it at communicating some mathematical insight. So we we like we weigh all three of those things. We don't have any, you know, simple way of measuring, but those are the things we're looking for, all three. And uh there are several judges and I really appreciate them helping. This this prize was created when I turned 60. My wife um wanted to do something for my 60th birthday, which was so nice of her, and she got got people to create this prize >> where we can encourage high school students, open to the whole world. It's not just us. It's it's a world. >> Are there many applications? >> Yeah. This year we had about a hundred applicants >> and um we try to give lots of prizes. >> Yeah. >> Is it easy for you in the in the committee to agree like on this? >> It is pretty easy. Yeah, it is pretty easy. There are some often some standouts that um are amazingly impressive. It's it's great what students will think of and it also gives a chance for someone to be mathematically expressive in a different way. Right? We we know about math circles, math olympiad. There's there's traditional ways of being a young mathematician and expressing your love of math and interest in math. But this is another way which is to share your love of math with other people. And it attracts possibly different kinds of students. Sometimes students work in groups. There could be teams that submit um an entry. Sometimes it attracts people who are more interdisciplinary or artistic. They they see math and how it connects to poetry or to dance or to science or business or whatever. Um, and so a student who is broader than than a usual math olympiad person, I'm not saying a math olympiad person isn't broad, but but it's a different dimension of math that doesn't normally get as much. >> So, what are the prizes that you give? >> Oh, well, we give money. >> So, it's in multiples of pi. they get, you know, a hundred pi dollars or 200 pi dollars, you know, or 600 roughly $600. So, it's not um it's for a kid it's a it's a significant amount of money, but also >> No, no, no. And it's >> it's a na it's an international award. They can use it on their CV and they're very proud. >> I I >> I just thought I do have a teenager uh kid of a friend who is into math. So, I should tell him to apply. >> They should apply. And then also we have um zoom sessions where I meet the students and also write little things about their project and >> oh nice >> we sometimes display their work at the museum national museum of math math in New York City. So yeah people you can go on the math website and see some of the previous winners projects. It's impressive what they what they do. It's always fun to see what the students come up with. the question that's really important to me because h I'm now trying unrelated completely to everything we discussed I'm trying myself to to write a non-mathematical book >> as a side side project of my life >> but I was wondering how do how do you find confidence to write a book as in when you're writing how can you be sure that you wrote it in a good way because for you okay I think my task is easier for you you have to be interesting accessible funny and like all these things together so how how do you like you write some words and then how do you know that it's, you know, the right way to put them. >> The closest I can come to thinking of a good answer to that is, I think, in terms of my own reactions to things that I found moving or thrilling. You know, I so I um read a lot. you know, if I'm reading different science writers or math writers who have made an impression on me, I try to watch what they're doing. Uh, I did write an article that was in the notices of the American Math Society that was called um writing writing about math for the traumatized and the perplexed. I I especially like this audience. There are people who already like math and a lot of us write >> that do math popularization write for people who like math naturally like Martin Gardner you know did that >> Ian Stewart does that and a lot of people but I I'm especially interested in the people who are scared of math or don't like it or um I I would like to attract them to see that it's more interesting than they think or >> ah so people who actively dislike math. You try to attract them. >> I do. I am interested in them. Yeah. I mean, yes, some of them I I don't want to make it too extreme. Some people actively dislike it. I would love to reach them. There are other people who don't dislike it. They're just indifferent. They don't hate it. They don't love it. They don't care. They never saw the point of it. A lot of smart a lot of smart people feel that way. So that is also a population I'm very interested in that they don't see any point and they don't know why someone would like it. They've heard they may have heard people say, "Oh, it's elegant. It's beautiful." But they don't get it. What's beautiful about it? Okay, I want to try to show them. And so how to do it? I think of articles or books that I have read in my you know 65 years on earth that there were people who said something a certain way that made me excited and then I think well what did they do? And I wrote about them in this article that I just mentioned. And so I gave three examples of people who used different strategies that that worked for me and that I try to copy or you know or borrow from what they did. So like Steven Jay Gould I mean he writes about evolution he writes about biology but he always begins with some little story about something in everyday life or pop culture and it's not intimidating. It's very easy. Another guy who I like very much has named Lewis Thomas also wrote about biology. His stuff is very poetic. Reading his words, I always feel like I want to listen to the rhythms and the word choices. He's also very funny. Actually, as I look at this article, I see that I can give you a better answer to your question. You asked how to do outreach. So I said um I had three strategies that I think work a lot which I summarized as illuminate. Strategy one, try to illuminate. Try to give the reader a shiver of pleasure. Uh you know some kind of aha experience. I now understand something. So I've been illuminated. The light bulb has gone on. And that means actually showing some math. A lot of people think that you don't shouldn't write about math if it's math popularization. But yes, you should. You should try to give them some genuine mathematical experience which could be at a very elementary level but it should be genuine. Um, another thing besides illumination is connection. If you can make connections either between different parts of math that the reader might already like or between something else that the reader enjoys. So that's this trick that Stephen Jay Gould would do that he would have you he would be writing about movies or TV shows or something you saw at at a museum or a flower or something easy and then connected to something deep. So by this it's about connections with him. That was his trick. Tie the math to something the reader already enjoys. And then the other thing se method three is to be a friend. Treat the reader like a friend of yours. If you really visualize that this is not just a reader. This is your friend. Like picture a real person that you like. You will take on a very sweet voice. You'll be nice. You'll automatically because it's your friend. >> You'll automatically be gentle. Well, it's really good. I think of how rarely in, you know, I earlier I was complaining about our math articles. People don't write like they're writing to their friend. They write actually like they're writing to their enemy who's going to criticize them and find a mistake in their proof, right? They're they're writing immediately from a posture of defensiveness like this. >> That's not the voice you want. You got if you treat the reader like your friend who wants to learn and wants to understand, but they don't know things. If you're really friendly, you'll instinctively do everything right. But we don't we don't think we don't think like that. So, so those are three strategies. Illuminate, connect, and be friendly. >> Speaking of poetic, so I very much can enjoy poetic writing, but you said like you see how other people have written it and you try to, you know, maybe >> Yeah. not do the same way but like but when I read something poetic I don't know how to write in a poetic way so it's >> but you can practice you could practice you poetry may be too intimidating for for you or for most people >> practice to to write uh >> I tried to I listen to them like I say I read them out loud >> and then um >> you can hear certain rhythms certain >> musicality in their >> I see your PhD coming shining through >> oh because of the rhythm Yes. >> Um, I don't have any training in music, but I'm interested in music. I have a very musical daughter, my younger daughter, >> and I think I might have some natural inclination toward music that's not developed. Um, so maybe it comes out a little bit in the writing. I actually in my style of writing uh or my technique, I often dictate into my phone. >> You know, on the phone there's a little microphone. You can just talk into your phone and it will make a >> speech to text. >> I I do that frequently for writing the introduction. I will often just dictate >> what I want to say and it comes out very conversational because that's the way people talk. >> And then of course it needs editing. Most of it is terrible, >> but some of it is really pretty good. >> And so for people who wonder how can their voice become friendlier in their writing, try dictating instead of typing. If you just talk into the phone and imagine a real person that you're talking to, a friend and the friend could could be at different levels. It could be another mathematician, it could be your sister, could be anybody depending what you're trying to do, you know, and um so depending on your audience, just talk to that audience and picture a real person, not a not an abstract generalized reader. And if you talk to that real person, you'll probably come up with something pretty warm and it will give you good material that you can edit into a nice part of your work, you know? I mean, it's trivial, right? Trivial in a good way. >> Yeah. Yeah. I I love it. I shall try. [Music]