Rupert’s Property
You can cut a hole in a cube that’s big enough to slide an identical cube through that hole!   Think about that for a minute—it’s kind of weird.
Amazingly, nobody could prove any convex polyhedron
doesn’t
have this property!  It’s called ‘Rupert’s property’.
Until this week.
This week Steininger and Yurkevich proved there is a convex polyhedron that you
can’t
cut a hole in big enough to slide the entire polyhedron through the hole.  It has 90 vertices, and
apparently
240 edges and 152 faces.
To prove that no such hole is possible, they had to do a computer search of 18 million different holes, plus use a lot of extra math to make sure they’d checked enough possibilities:
• Jakob Steininger and Sergey Yurkevich,
A convex polyhedron without Rupert’s property
.
To celebrate their discovery, they gave this polyhedron a silly name.  Since this polyhedron lacks Rupert’s property, they called it a ‘noperthedron’.
Why is this property called ‘Rupert’s property’?
Wikipedia
explains:
In geometry,
Prince Rupert’s cube
is the largest cube that can pass through a hole cut through a unit cube without splitting it into separate pieces. Its side length is approximately 1.06, 6% larger than the side length 1 of the unit cube through which it passes. The problem of finding the largest square that lies entirely within a unit cube is closely related, and has the same solution.
Prince Rupert’s cube is named after
Prince Rupert of the Rhine
, who asked whether a cube could be passed through a hole made in another cube of the same size without splitting the cube into two pieces. A positive answer was given by John Wallis. Approximately 100 years later, Pieter Nieuwland found the largest possible cube that can pass through a hole in a unit cube.
Here Greg Egan shows how Rupert’s property works for the cube:
Here he shows how it works for the regular octahedron:
And finally, here’s a video by David Renshaw showing 26 polyhedra with Rupert’s property… and 5 polyhedra that might lack it:
The triakis tetrahedron is an extremely close call, but it does have Rupert’s property:
Related
This entry was posted  on Thursday, August 28th, 2025 at 7:50 am and is filed under
mathematics
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the
RSS 2.0
feed.
											You can
leave a response
, or
trackback
from your own site.
Post navigation
« Previous Post
Next Post »
8 Responses to
Rupert’s Property
Julius Jääskeläinen
says:
28 August, 2025 at 8:27 am
your link seems to be broken, I think this is the correct link
https://arxiv.org/html/2508.18475
Reply
John Baez
says:
28 August, 2025 at 12:10 pm
My link was broken—thanks!  I always try to link to the abstract:
• Jakob Steininger and Sergey Yurkevich,
A convex polyhedron without Rupert’s property
.
You can quickly get the HTML or PDF from the abstract, but half the time reading the abstract is enough for me.
Reply
John Baez
says:
29 August, 2025 at 7:35 am
A nice, not hard result of Rahul Narain: there are convex polyhedra with Rupert’s property arbitarily close to spherical in shape.  I’ll leave this one as a puzzle!
Closeness here is measured using the
Hausdorff metric
on compact subsets of
which is the sort of obvious thing.
A harder puzzle I don’t know the answer to.  Are there shapes without Rupert’s property that you can pass through a hole in themselves if you turn them while you move them?
Reply
Pierre-Alain Fayolle
says:
29 August, 2025 at 9:46 am
The silly name (noperthedron) possibly comes from here (“Nopert”):
https://sigbovik.org/2025/proceedings.pdf#page=356
Reply
John Baez
says:
29 August, 2025 at 5:26 pm
Interesting!  Thanks.
Reply
Worley
says:
2 September, 2025 at 2:35 pm
It seems to be taken for granted that we are interested in whether a polyhedron can pass through a hole solely by translation along a line.  Do the answers change if one allows the hole to be non-prismatic or the passing-through polyhedron to rotate or wiggle?
Reply
John Baez
says:
2 September, 2025 at 9:47 pm
Worley wrote:
It seems to be taken for granted that we are interested in whether a polyhedron can pass through a hole solely by translation along a line.
Right.  The math gets a lot harder otherwise.   See my next comment for a more precise specification of the question people are studying.
Do the answers change if one allows the hole to be non-prismatic or the passing-through polyhedron to rotate or wiggle?
I think the answer is “nobody knows”, given that we’re assuming the polyhedra are convex.  I’ve seen various people asking this question, and no answer yet.
By the way, you can sometimes slip a nonconvex polyhedron A (say one shaped like a boomerang) through a curved hole in a convex polyhedron B, even when it’s impossible to fit A through any straight hole in B.
Reply
John Baez
says:
2 September, 2025 at 9:49 pm
I told my friend Michael Fourman about the Noperthedron and he quickly came up with this interesting question:
Can you make 3 convex polyhedra A,B,C such that
• you can cut a hole through A big enough to slide B through, but not vice versa
• you can cut a hole through B big enough to slide C through, but not vice versa
• you can cut a hole through C big enough to slide A through, but not vice versa
?
I have no idea—but if you can, it would be great to use a 3d printer to make these polyhedra, with the holes cut out, and actually slide them through each other!
Technical note:
When I say “you can cut a hole through A big enough to slide B through”, here’s how people usually make this precise.  It means you can rotate and translate A in 3d space, and then project A onto the xy plane and get a subset A’ of the plane, and do the same for B to get a subset B’, such that B’ is contained in the interior of A’.
This means, very roughly, that we can drill a hole
straight through
A and then move B
straight through
this hole, not turning it or wiggling it as you go.
Are there convex polyhedra where relaxing this definition and allowing weirder holes, or turning and wiggling, lets us slide B through A when we couldn’t otherwise?   This question has been floating around lately.   I think nobody knows!
If B is nonconvex, it’s obvious that a curved hole and turning B as you go can help.
Reply
You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked
*
Comment
*
Name
*
Email
*
Website
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ