- Good afternoon. I'm Dan Freed. And it's a pleasure to welcome you here to the fifth in this
series of seven lectures about the Millennium Prize Problems. These lectures are sponsored jointly by the mathematics department here, by the CMSA, Harvard Center, Mathematical Sciences and Applications, and also by the Clay
Mathematics Institute. I keep these introductions short. So we're just going to
go right to this problem, the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. And we're thrilled to have our own Barry Mazur
tell us about it today. - Well, as Dan just said, we're going to muse about the Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Whoops. Oh, gosh. I got to learn how to manage this clicker. And it's a Millennium Prize Problem. And I'll be thinking about it and thinking about Dick
Gross, who died recently. He was a blessing to all
of his friends and family, of course, and to the math department, to the university, to the community of mathematicians. In fact, to anyone he encountered. And we'll see his influence on
the subject a bit this hour. Now, there, you see the
originators of our little subject, Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. I have to learn how to run this thing. There's Birch and there's Swinnerton-Dyer in there youth incarnations. And there, below, in
their maturity and wisdom. And they had the wisdom in the 1950s to use the EDSAC computer in
Cambridge to make computations, which suggested a striking connection between basic global arithmetic invariant of an elliptic curve defined over the field of rational numbers, that is to say, the rank of
its group of rational points, and something that seems
somewhat different. Certain asymptotics of its
local arithmetic invariants. The number of its rational
points over finite fields. And then this initial observation evolved into their conjecture. And I'm going to talk about general ideas, the general shape of it, and its ever expanding development. And I'll try to do this in as non-technical a way as is feasible. So it's a conjecture, that
I write here, that unifies. There's power in the words that I've put on that screen. Conjecture, problem, hypothesis, program. They're frames for mathematical
assertions that call for, that coalesce to do new mathematics. Now, a conjecture might take on a devil's advocate posture. Prove me wrong if you can. It might capture mathematical ideas in a volatile early state. I say, think of Riemann's Hypothesis. Now, if you take a glance
at the Riemann's 1859 paper, you'll see that the subject
is completely volatile. Or the Poincare Conjecture. Do the same with Poincare. Hey, it's even more
volatile in his framing of what we call the Poincare Conjecture. And might be meant to
inspire further developments. The famous unifier of that
sort is the Langlands Program. It's meant to unify, to bind together different ways of seeing, different types of intuition, different subjects. And the Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer, I'm going to call it BSD for short, is a unifier. And not only has it unified, but it's in constant
evolution, even today. Here's our program. I'm going to begin by discussing
three different formats of what I want to call Classic BSD. And there are three
versions of Classic BSD. There is the first one, which is just the historical starter. The initial conception of
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer, which gives an asymptotic expression for the variable X to the rank of the group of rational
points of E over Q as X tends to infinity. And the asymptotic expression is, as I mentioned in the previous slide, is in terms of local invariants of E. Version two is similar. But it's a much neater formula. It's something you can actually, you might be tempted to actually look at sort of more closely for the rank of the
group of rational points. Also in terms of local invariants. But with a twist here. And the version three is
a structural statement. I'll call it, that doesn't
have a standard name, but I'll call it the Rank
= Multiplicity Conjecture. And all three of them are, they're very close to each other. And they're closely
related ways of expressing, as I say, the beginning
form of the conjecture. Now, at that point, we'll pass to what I'll call Refined BSD. And as I said a minute ago, it evolves, it evolves, it evolves. And, finally, to what I'll
call BSD Expanded, okay? Okay, as I said a few minutes ago, Classic BSD expresses a
specific global invariant of an elliptic curve, the rank of the group of
its rational points over Q, in terms of local invariants, the number of its rational points, but over finite fields. Refined BSD is quite a thing. It draws into the same
arena all these theories, if you want, or aspects
of the elliptic curve. There's the local arithmetic. And it's the group of rational points of the elliptic curve over prime fields. There's the analytic number
theory of the elliptic curve. There's the global arithmetic. And I put the global
arithmetic in two boxes here because what's curious is it's a group. And you could take it mod torsion. And if you take it mod torsion, it plays one role in the final
structure of the conjecture. And if you take the torsion
subgroup separately, that will play a different role. Okay, there's a pre-cursor from BSD. It's usually called the
class number formula. The class number formula is, it's a statement about a number field. Not on elliptic curve. And it's a theorem. Not a conjecture. It began, as surmised by
Gauss, about quadratic fields. It was then extended to sort of an actual
statement by Dirichlet. Quadratic fields, again,
generalized to all number fields. And, finally, over a century later, there was an actual proof. Now, that class number formula is a model for BSD in some sense
because it too is a unifier. It brings in the analytic
number theory of K, the class number of K, the order of the ideal class group of K, and the global arithmetic of the K. That is to say, the units mod torsion and the torsion in the group of units, alias the roots of unity in K. Yeah. So I'm going to give you
names for all of those things. So hK is the class number of K. LK, I want to call the analytic L of K, rather than having to say all the time, it's the residue of the
Dedekind zeta function of K at s = 1. But that's what it is, okay? The regulator. You take the group of units in
the number field mod torsion. And you can embed it
in the Euclidean space, just by taking a sort of a
natural logarithm mapping. And then you get a lattice. Lattice has a fundamental domain. The fundamental domain has a volume. And that is the regulator of K. And wK is, you can call it the order of the torsion subgroup of
K* if you want to be a... Well, anyway, it is just the
number of roots of unity in K. And this is a formula. There are some elementary terms, which don't live up to the complexity of the boxes with blue objects in there. The class number. It's a class number formula. So I write it as the class
number is equal to something. And it's equal to some
elementary things times the wK over the regulator times
the analytic L of K. But we're going to talk
about elliptic curves. So let's do that. You know, elliptic curves and their global arithmetic invariants. And I want to do it in, as I say, in the spirit of Poincare. And take a look at that picture. He's thinking of something. (audience laughing) Okay. He viewed an elliptic curve
as a plane cubic curve. He never says defined over Q in the paper. But, anyway. As a plane cubic curve situated
in the projective plane in such a way that the
line of infinity intersects at a single point, therefore a flex-point, point of multiplicity three. To put it in another way, if you ignore the line at infinity there, that is to say, take it
as an affine plane curve, you're missing only one point. The point at infinity. Now, every line in the projective
plane intersects the curve in three points, counting multiplicity. And here's the standard picture of it. And such a smooth projective curve has, amazingly, a canonical
abelian group structure. The flex-point at infinity is the origin. And all the triplets of collinear points, that is, the intersection taken with multiplicity of the curve with the projective lines add to zero. So we've got P + Q + R = 0 if P, Q, and R are collinear. And, of course, you get similar statements with counting multiplicities
if there are multiplicities. Now, Poincare, in his 1901 paper, really got things started. Here's Poincare. Always, with everything he wrote, by the way, it has a flare. And he wrote a lot. A lot about the philosophy
of mathematics as well. Okay, so here's what he writes. "Let's first study the distribution of rational points on these curves. I note that knowledge
of two rational points on a rational cubic is sufficient to get us to know a third." (Barry speaking French) I don't know whether this would, anyway. Now, without stating this explicitly, Poincare views the set of rational points as an abelian group. And there are no proofs in his paper. None at all. But he defines the rank to be the number of points playing the
role of P and Q needed to get all the rational
points on the curve as the R's such that you've got
those collinear triplets, P + Q + R equals infinity. Pretty good. In effect, he anticipates
Mordell's Theorem, which is proved, as I
said, two decades later. And here's Mordell in youth and in wisdom. The headline there is, "Beats
the world at mathematics." Okay, and this is how he
states it in his paper. "If a non-singular
rational plane cubic curve has a rational point, then the group of rational points is finitely generated." Finitely generated. So it is of the form of torsion subgroup. That, which is finite, and a free part, which has to look like
Z to the r for some r. And so it gives us the
global arithmetic invariants of our elliptic curve. That is the torsion subgroup. It's a group of torsion points. It's a theorem that only finitely many such isomorphic classes of
finite abelian groups can occur as such a group. And much is known about them. And its rank. Now, the rank. Well, that's, much is known. But much is unknown. For example, is there a finite
upper bound for these ranks? And there is a conjecture of the people in the two blue lines at
the bottom of this screen. And that paper's really interesting. Take a look at it. The elliptic curve with
the highest rank found so far is this thing in red, which I'm sure would've amazed
Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer, who in the 1950s, did
their computations where... I don't know. I don't think there's anybody in this room who did computations in the mid 1950s. But they came then, sheafs of paper, leaning in its angle of repose with absolutely illegible numbers on. And you have to figure
out what you've got. And I got such in my office. Chimura gave me a big
bookcase full of papers for eigenvalues and Hecke operators. Roughly this, well, a
little later than this. But pretty much at that time. The curve was recently discovered by Noam. Oh, you're here. There you are. You agree? You discovered this. And Zev. (audience laughing) No, I'm not sure. I'm not sure.
- [Noam] Clarkburg and I. - [Barry] What? - [Noam] Zev, Clarksburg and I, yes. - [Barry] What? - [Noam] Zev, Clarksburg and I, yes. - [Barry] Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, great. Terrific. And it has rank greater
than or equal to 29. And using GRH, you can prove
its rank is exactly 29. Now, for the local arithmetic
invariants of elliptic curve. I'm writing the equations
that define elliptic curves in the form of that equation. Equation one. And the c's are all rational integers. And you can get any elliptic curve over Q with such an equation. And one often chooses
such a parametrization with smallest discriminant. The blue subscripts there is to say how the coefficients change
if you zoom the exponents. So assume we have such a thing. Minimal discriminant. And so that all these c's are integers. So we can, for every prime
p, we can reduce mod p. We get a cubic curve
over the prime field, Fp. And if p doesn't divide the discriminant, the curve is an elliptic curve over Fp. So we can play the game of putting Np to be the number of points on
that elliptic curve over Fp. And the thing in blue is
what I'm going to take as the ensemble of local
arithmetic invariants of E. Okay. And you get such a thing for every p, not dividing the discriminant. Now, that comes the first
classic version of BSD. I say the asymptotics of the local invariants
seem to determine the rank. And the equation at the bottom
of this screen simply says that the product of the Np's over p's, for p's less than or equal to X, varies like a power of log X. And that power is the rank. That's their observation and
conjecture in the initial form. You can take logs. You do that, you get the
log of that thing is linear. So, to say, is asymptotically
linear in log log X. And the slope of that
linearity is the rank. So here are some examples. Look at the elliptic curves,
Ed, as on the screen. And for the five values
of d in blue up there, the elliptic curve, Ed, has rank 0 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. And here's a picture of X, of log of the product of Np over p for p less than or equal
to X as a function of X, but graphed over the log, graphed over log log X. There it is. I took it from a paper of
Karl Ruben, Alice Silverberg. And by golly, the slopes there correspond to the ranks of the five curves. The data for each of the five curves. Looks like the data is
hovering around the line of the appropriate slope. So all of this seems to be
in line with Classic BSD. Here's a second classic version. The first thing to say is that the local and arithmetic invariants
of elliptic curves, well, you'll see. We're going to take
them not what they are, but just take them as error terms, following the results of Helmut Hasse. Hasse noted that the
number of rational points of any smooth irreducible curve over a finite field tends to hover around the number of rational points of the line over Fp, namely p + 1. And it does this with
roughly square root accuracy. This might suggest that if we want to focus our attention more specifically to what's happening, we could renormalize the
local arithmetic invariants of an elliptic curve by focusing
on the error term there. And we have Hasse's theorem. Hasse proves, for p not
dividing the discriminant of E, that if you form this error
term, ap is 1 + p - Np, it really does grow. You really do get square root accuracy if you take 1 + p. That is to say, the absolute value of ap is less than
twice the square root p. So we could take this
ensemble of these error terms, the ap's, as a more focused form of local arithmetic invariants of E. Every once in a while, you're
going to see a footnote. That will be in my slides in my webpage. Probably more footnotes than are here. But there's a beautiful version of this in the paper that I've
just footnoted there. And you could take a look at it more specifically in
the slides on my webpage. But if you replace the Np's
by these ap's, you get, as a corollary of the analytic
theory that we will discuss, this formula for the rank of E. That is to say, the limit of
one over log X times the sum of ap of E log p over
p's is equal to that. 1/2 minus the rank of E. You should notice that the rank of E comes with a negative sign there. That is to say, the ap's tend to be negative
if the rank is large. And that makes sense. Because that may means the Np's are large if the rank is large. Third classical version, classic version, and it implies the second one, is by passing to L-functions. Now, I was still using
the arithmetic behavior of E over finite fields. And we are passing to the
analytic number theory of E with input from the arithmetic behavior of E over finite field. We do this by the Hasse-Weil L-function, which is an infinite product. At the moment, it's just
a formal infinite product of mathematical symbols where each of these bracketed things
are called Euler factors. And there it is as a
formal infinite product. The epsilon just stands
for elementary factors. It's not going to play a
role in anything we say. And if you write it out
as a Dirichlet series, it's a sum of an over n to the s. The coefficients turn out to be, for n prime, are exactly the ap of E's of the previous version of Classic BSD. So the LE of s is just another way of, so to speak, denoting the
local arithmetic invariants. But Hasse's Theorem actually tells us that it converges to an analytic function if the real part of s is greater than 3/2. So that's good. It's no longer a mere formal device. It's an analytic function. Real part of s is greater than 3/2. And so we might take that full
ensemble, an of E for all n, as our third version of local
arithmetic invariants of E and view them as coefficients of the Dirichlet series
given in the equation. The great thing though is that L-function admits
analytic continuation to an analytic function on
the entire complex plane. And that's not an exercise
in analytic number theory. It's a consequence of
the modularity theorem, proven by these people. Okay, so the analytic
function LE of s around s = 1. Well, it's an analytic function. It has behavior. But even though the
infinite product expression for the Hasse L-function doesn't converge, that infinite product expression
doesn't converge at s = 1, the analytic continuation still exists. And so it might be fun to take a look at the Euler factors for p, not dividing the discriminant,
at that value of s. At s = 1, that's what it looks like. And if you take a look
at what it looks like, it turns out to be the
inverse of Np over p. So even though the infinite product of Euler factors doesn't
converge for s = 1, we can play with it. And we could write LE of 1, there are quotation marks
around the equal sign, is equal to the product of Np over p, times the harmless factors that
I ignored before, inversed. And this product is, overall, prime p's. So this doesn't make any sense. But you can view it in this way. You could say the left
hand side of this equation, it stands for the manner in which the analytic function tends to or doesn't tend to zero as s tends to one. Namely, as a power of s - 1. The power being the multiplicity of the zero of LE of s at s = 1. And, similarly, the right hand
side stands for the manner in which the inverse of
the product of Np over p's, for p less equal to X, tends
to zero as X tends to infinity. And, after all, conjecturally, that's Birch and
Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture. Asymptotically, it's X
to the minus rank of E. So that equation that
doesn't make much sense, except as a goad, suggests that those two powers are equal and gives us the following
third version of Classic BSD, which I call the Rank =
Multiplicity Conjecture. The analytic function LE of s has a zero at s = 1 of multiplicity its rank. And we might state it more succinctly if we define ran to be the analytic rank with the multiplicity of zero and ralg, the algebraic rank, to be the rank of the
group of rational points. And then we could say our ralg is equal, the conjecture is ralg is equal to ran. Now, thanks to work of these people, and I'm not, again, I'm not going to go through it here. But it will be on my webpage in a greater, with more explicit discussion of what each of these people did. We have partial results towards the Rank = Multiplicity Conjecture and towards its substantial
surrounding mathematics. For example, that Rank =
Multiplicity Conjecture is true if the analytic rank is
less than or equal to one. Okay, now, we're ready for Refined BSD. The basic ingredients. The analytic L of E is simply, well, this is defined by assuming the Classic BSD conjecture. So we can write LE of s is equal to some constant, non-zero constant, actually, a real constant, times s - 1 to the r + higher terms. And where the r there is, we were assuming Classic BSD, either the algebraic
rank or the analytic rank at your pleasure. Now comes a thing that's
analogous to the class number, except it's analogous to this
class number in the formula. It's, by no means, analogous
to the class number in terms of computation. Class number is a sort of
very friendly invariant. It really wants to be computed. Although it takes some computation. This is a different sort of thing. By definition, an E-torsor over Q is a projective smooth curve over Q that is a homogeneous space with a transitive and free
action by the elliptic curve where the elliptic curve is viewed as an algebraic group
acting on that curve. So it's a curve, if you want. Or, as you'll see, we're only interested in
isomorphic classes of these curves. And I'll call such an E-torsor, a curve, a good E-torsor if it
has a Qp-rational point for every prime p and a
rational point over R. May not have a rational point over Q. If it has a rational
point over Q, this a good, E-torsor is really very good. It's isomorphic to E. If it doesn't, it's interesting. Now, there's a natural
abelian group structure on the set of isomorphism
classes of these good E-torsors. And it's denoted by this
Russian letter, ShaE, and called the
Shafarevich-Tate group of E. And then there is the conjecture. The Shafarevich-Tate Conjecture
is that that ShaE is finite. Well, hey, if it's supposed to be analogous to the class
number, it better be finite. But what's interesting about this conjecture is
that when it was made, there wasn't a single example where it was known to be finite. So it takes a certain
amount of daring to make it. On the other hand, if you go to the collected volumes of John Tate or Shafarevich, you won't find it there. They don't own it, exactly. But they clearly have set
the stage miraculously well to make such a conjecture. Okay, here's the most famous
example of a good torsor. And it's really the starter
for studying such torsors and for Selmer groups that we'll be talking
about in a few minutes. And it's called Selmer's cubic curve. And it's the easiest equation
you can imagine for a curve. There it is. It has a Qp rational
point, for a cubic curve. It has a Qp rational point for every prime p and a real point, but no Q-rational point. And it's a homogeneous space
for the elliptic curve, X cubed + Y cubed + 60 Z cubed = 0. That is to say C is a good E-torsor. Now, there's a E of Q. Let us say the group of rational points of the elliptic curve over Q. There's this ShaE, which
is conjecturally finite. But we don't know. And you might think, as I say here, on first view, that the various ways of computing rational points on elliptic curves are
completely different from the ways of computing Sha, which has to do with algebraic curves with action of algebraic groups on them. The first is a problem in arithmetic. And the second being about objects in algebraic geometry, torsors. But, as I say happily, for our subject, there's a natural family of intermediary objects much
more directly computable than either of these things that plays a role in helping
compute both of them. Namely, Selmer groups associated
to the elliptic curve. So what's in that box here is, for every N, you get a group. It's a finite abelian group, SelmerN E. And it's defined very easily in terms of cohomology related to, not even related to all of E. All you need to know is the
subgroup of N-torsion of E with its Galois action. And you get this group. Well, that you would expect
it's easily computable. And it is. And there are natural exact sequences that combine rational points and Sha with Selmer in this way. This is rational points, modulo N times rational points. So, for example, if E of
Q would be Z to the r, then this would be Z mod N to the r. And the brackets N here means the kernel of multiplication by N in Sha. So it's a good piece of Sha if N is large. And, as I say here, it
plays an important role in understanding both E of Q and ShaE and a strange way of thinking about the group of rational points of E. At least when you tensor it by Qp. And what I'm writing here assumes the Shafarevich-Tate conjecture. That is to say, for every prime p, there's a canonical
isomorphism between E of Q, well, tensored with Qp, and the limit of these Selmer groups, again, tensored with Qp. Now, that's Sha. That's a discussion of Sha. Now, it's a discussion
of the regulator of E, corresponding to the
regulator of the number field. Namely, there's a canonical height pairing on rational points of elliptic curve. And Neron and Tate introduced their canonical height pairing, which is a non-degenerate bilinear pairing on the group of rational
points of elliptic curves that provides us with a canonical
embedding of E mod torsion as a lattice in Euclidean space, just like one has units mod torsion as a lattice in Euclidean space. And you take its volume to get the regulator of the number field. Well, the volume of this
lattice is denoted RegE. And it's called the regulator
of the elliptic curve. Okay, so here's the refined Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer Conjecture. And it's totally, as I say here, resonant with the classical
class number formula. The way I put it is,
as a formula for ShaE, ShaE is elementary terms that don't play that much of a role as a mystery, times the square of the order of the torsion group of
E of Q, that's like wK, over the regulator of E, that's like the regulator of K, all of it times L of the E. The analytic L of E, that's like the analytic L of K. I said it's resonant with
class number formula. But there are differences. And here are a few. You might argue that they're not, even though they look
pretty much the same, they seem to have a slightly
different structure, if you want. And, also, the full conjectured meaning of the analytic L of E is already embedded in the Refined BSD conjecture. And, also, the Shafarevich-Tate
conjecture is embedded in it. And, finally, it's the square of the order of the torsion that enters,
rather than the torsion. But these are, if you
want, minor differences and set the pattern
for further expansions. So one can expand further, as I say here, from elliptic curves over Q to abelian varieties over Global fields and by making explicit the role of certain types of rational
points in the formula. And this brings us to what's
called Heegner Points. Heegner Point is associated
to the elliptic curve and an inappropriate auxiliary
quadratic imaginary field. Now, a choice of Heegner
Point really introduces the main character in the proof of what I've said before was proof. Namely, the Rank = Multiplicity Conjecture when the analytic rank is
less than or equal to one. So now, here, I'm quoting from Bryan Birch's "Heegner
Points: The Beginning." He writes that, in 1982,
he received a number of letters from Dick Gross, the first of which began, "I recently found an amusing method to study Heegner points on J0 of N." Bryan writes, "It was exciting
because for the first time, it related the index of
the Heegner point in E of Q to the order of the
Tate-Shafarevich group." And he responded to Dick, "You seem to be opening so many doors that I'm almost afraid to push." Bryan recalls that Dick
translated this into, "Get shoving, you lucky so-and-so." (audience laughing) Okay, so Gross, and Zagier, And Kolyvagin. So suppose we know of the
Rank = Multiplicity Conjecture and that they're both, rank and algebraic rank and
analytic rank is equal to one. Suppose we know all that. And then it would follow from
BSD that there is a point, I mean, after all, if the
algebraic rank is one, the group of rational points of Q is just Z plus a finite group. So there should be a
point of infinite order that would be a finite
index in that group. So you might look for an expression for the Refined BSD in this way. LE equals elementary
factors times height of P times Sha over the index
of the group generated by the point in the full group
of rational points squared. Now, it would be a stronger result if we could actually produce, explicitly, a point P fitting into that equation. And, as I say here, this is exactly what Dick Gross and Don
Zagier do in their paper. The point being a Heegner point. I have some footnotes here. I say since this talk
is only an hour long, I'll not get into the elegant
definition of Heegner points. Think of them as points in E of Q defined and made explicit via their
structural relationship to the elliptic curve. And now, Kolyvagin's work
compliments Gross and Zagier by proving that the Heegner
point P has infinite order and the group it generates in the group of rational points is of finite index if the analytic rank is one. And that is what completes the proof of the Rank = Multiplicity Conjecture when the rank is equal to one. The analytic rank is equal to one. You can go further. They call it the Bloch-Kato Conjecture. You're moving from elliptic curves over Q to algebraic geometry
over number fields K. So Bloch and Kato, as I say here, they extended the frame of that conjecture from elliptic curves to all smooth proper algebraic varieties over number fields K. As I say here too, this generalization is elegant since, to formulate it, you don't
even have to know much about the algebraic variety X. They deal with an object V that's just a p-adic Galois representation that comes from the geometry of X. Oops. Oh my god. That might be a sign. This is my last slide. And I see that the time might be such that if I wanted questions,
the time for questions, this would be a good time to and that I did have a little discussion about Bloch and Kato, which
will be on my webpage. Okay, what we see here is, circled, the very beginning
of the story, Np over p. And as I write up there, this is not yet the end of the expansion and evolution of that initial observation of Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. Okay, and I'm happy that I, at least, I have time for questions. (audience clapping)