

Does Mathematics Progress? – Feature Column

Skip to content

Does Mathematics Progress?

In:

2026
, 
Discrete Math and Combinatorics
, 
History of mathematics
, 
Joseph Malkevitch

Tagged:

artificial intelligence
, 
P=NP
, 
tilings

Every time some
mathematical question is answered, it generates new
mathematical issues to think about....

Does Mathematics Progress?

Joe Malkevitch

York College (CUNY)

Introduction

With the beginning of
a New Year—2026 in one system of counting, though not all societies use
the same calendar—many people take the opportunity to examine how their lives changed or progressed during
the course of the prior year. Some relate this to the observation that
an unexamined life is not worth living. Not only can one examine one's
own life for how it progresses with time, one can also examine the
different areas of knowledge that humans have named and have studied
both from the perspective of history, and how this knowledge can assist
us in leading our lives. 
Here I take a small look at how mathematics, viewed as a body of
knowledge has progressed, changed, or evolved.

Progress viewed
historically

 There are currently about 8.3 billion humans
inhabiting the earth, a dramatically different number from what was the
case only 100 years ago, and in the more distant past, 2026 years ago.
Think for our purposes of a mathematics aficionado who we'll nickname Tangent Sphere
Projection (TSP for short). But wait, isn't TSP short for the Traveling
Salesperson Problem—that is, finding the shortest-measure (in time, distance or
cost) route that starts and ends in the same location and visits a
collection of sites once and only once? Sorry, Tangent!

Tangent and I
often go off on tangential thinking, say thinking about where we fit into this bigger picture of 8.3 billion people. A person
might start with thinking about where they fit into the world in
geographical terms. TSP might think about their current location—starting with small geographical terms rather than large ones. They live
in an apartment, in a building with 12 floors, and 6 apartments per
floor.  The apartment building  is in a neighborhood where there are few
other apartment buildings, there being mostly one family houses in this
neighborhood. But if the person lives in New York City, that large city
is made of 5 parts called boroughs, so perhaps they live in the
neighborhood called Bayside in the borough of Queens. But why stop at
the city one lives in? New York City lies within the state of New York,
which at the current time is one of 50 states making up the United
States.

But let us not stop
with a country, but situate the USA in North America, which lies in the
Western Hemisphere on Earth, which is one of 9 planets (old timers like
me still think of Pluto as a planet even if some scholars have now
downgraded it from that status), in the solar system of a small star,
which often is referred to as the Sun, but which is a star in the Milky
Way galaxy. The closest star to earth after the Sun is Proxima Centauri.
So TSP lives in various domains, some small and some gigantic.

 The purpose of this perhaps tangential (to the issue of
Mathematical Progress) discussion is to try to hint that when thinking
about the issue of mathematical progress, one has to set the question in
time and context. As the Feature Column tries to suggest, mathematics is
a complex and multifaceted subject.

What do I reference with this term

multifaceted
? I am alluding to the idea that polyhedra have different surface regions known as
facets, and that polyhedra with more facets are more complex than the
simplest polyhedron. This simplest polyhedron is the tetrahedron, which has only 4 facets. In the case of the regular tetrahedron all four of the faces are
congruent equilateral triangles.

Five polyhedra, known as Platonic Solids, made up of congruent regular polygons, shown as possible dice for use
in a game. The tetrahedron shown on the left consists of 4 equilateral
triangles. Image courtesy of Wikipedia.

 Different human
societies use different languages to communicate among themselves -
there are approximately 7100 different languages being used in the world
today. All societies have at different times in history found it
convenient to count, but the systems used to represent numbers has
changed. Thus, for the Romans, 2026 was not written that way but as
MMXXVI. Roman numerals are not a place notation system of the kind that
is now universally used in carrying out mathematics. In a place notation system
there are a fixed number of symbols, often called digits; by way of
example, say 4 digits  (say *, #, & and $) where the symbolic
expression #**& represents a different number from &***# because
the symbols read from left to right vary. The
number of digits used in the system is referred to as the
"base" of the number system. The number represented by  #**& is # multiplied by the base times itself 3 times added to *
multiplied by the base times itself 2 times added to * multiplied by the base times itself once added to &. Today we use the bases 10 and 2
almost exclusively; for example, 1345 in base ten stands for the number in words one thousand three hundred forty
five, while the same number in binary would be written as 10101000001.
At the hardware level, typically computers use a binary system of
representation. For large numbers, the binary system uses more symbols
than decimal but the rules for adding and multiplying the symbols is
simpler than it is for decimal. A multiplication table in binary is a
2x2 table (matrix or array) while in decimal the multiplication table is
a 10x10 table. 

 What bases were used by different cultures over
the centuries? The Mayan culture used base 20 and in Babylon base 60
was used. The base 10 numeral system we use today was invented in India and further refined by Islamic mathematicians. These choices of base are probably
related to the facts that humans have 10 fingers, humans have 20 fingers and toes, and
that 60 has many divisors: -1, 2, 3,4, 5, 6, 20, 12, 15, 30, and 60. In
the development of counting systems a milestone was to have a special
symbol for no objects—zero. In some early positional number systems
where a symbol had not been developed for zero, a gap or a space was
used to indicate that the symbol zero was being implied for that that
position.

Progress in mathematics
education

 Throughout the world it is now standard for
children to be required to go to school to learn information that will
make it possible for them to lead fulfilling lives and pay back to
society the benefits that accrue to them due to society's investment in
educating them at public expense. In the United States, learning about
mathematics and learning about numbers, shapes and patterns starts with
kindergarten (and sometimes preschool) and runs through high school. At
times particular groups of children have been classified as unable to
benefit by learning mathematics and have been put in tracks that make
careers that require a rich collection of mathematical skills
difficult to pursue. On the other hand, the curriculum
has often been structured so that the mathematics taught speeds the path
for those students who want to pursue careers needing mathematical
skills. This approach structures mathematics curriculum for all students
so that they can study calculus in grade 12. 

Though the number of
students who study calculus in high school has grown tremendously since
opportunities to take this college level course in high
school and get college credit for it have broadened, the number of
students who major in mathematics in college has not grown by equivalent
amounts. Furthermore, the emphasis on learning calculus before college
has muddied the waters about what mathematically based skills are needed
for disciplines other than mathematics itself, where learning calculus
is one of the major threads for courses required of mathematics majors
in college. Thus, the subject that has come to be known as discrete mathematics does
not get as much attention in K-12 education as skills related to mastering
calculus, which involves ideas in continuous mathematics. Yet discrete mathematics has made possible many
technologies Americans quickly came to love and endorse using! 

Mathematical progress

 Did mathematics progress on planet
Earth from 2025 to 2026? Those steeped in the issues of mathematics
and its history would immediately wonder what I might mean by
"mathematical progress," and, once the term is defined, how I
would measure it—assuming that what
I defined had aspects that allow one to
carry out measurements! Here I hope, by using informal language,
intuitive ideas, and the occasional tangent (a tangent to a Euclidean circle
is a line that has one point in common with the circle), to try to convey a sense of the properties I associate with mathematical progress.

Today, new
mathematics is produced by a large range of people. Some of these are
people who majored in mathematics in college and then pursued advanced degrees in mathematics. Loosely
speaking, to get a doctoral degree in mathematics, one is expected to
produce some "significant" new mathematics, but many doctoral
degrees consist of synthesizing old knowledge in a novel way or
organizing prior mathematical work. Scholars whose advanced degrees
are in subjects such as physics, chemistry, biology, economics also
produce new mathematics as a consequence of their study of issues they
investigate in their own subjects. New mathematics is also produced by
people with varied educational attainments who work on problems
that come up in the jobs that they have and cause them to study issues
as varied as fluid flows, how to distribute funds fairly that were made
available to people who suffered a natural emergency such as a
hurricane, or how to design a new linkage to help deal with an industrial
production problem.

New mathematics varies in its importance, which again could be measured in many different ways, as well as to what extent
it raises ideas that had little presence in earlier work. There is also
a certain amount of new mathematics that arises from the work of
amateurs and students. For example, for many years Martin Gardner (1914-2010), who
had little formal education in mathematics, wrote columns for Scientific
American where he raised questions and puzzles for the readers of the
magazine to ponder. Over time, these columns augmented with Gardner's
comments appeared in books addressed to the general public, though many
people in the mathematics community also read the columns and bought his
books. Some of these questions were posed by professional mathematicians
(e.g. John Conway (1937-2020) and Ronald Graham (1935-2020)) but
sometimes came from not mathematically trained readers of the column.

The amateur mathematician Marjorie Rice (1923-2017)
discovered four classes of pentagons which would tile the plane with no
holes or overlaps. Her work, together with other work on pentagonal
tiling resulted in there being a complete enumeration of the
types of pentagons which would tile the plane, where in some
of the tiling the pentagons met only along edges, but in some of the
tilings the pentagons don't fully match up along their edges. Given the
rules involved there turn out to be 15 types of pentagonal tiling; one
of the types has only one pentagon in that category but for many of the
types of pentagons there are infinitely many different non-congruent
pentagons in each type.

Posted by Tomruen 
on Wikipedia
, 
CC BY-SA 4.0

It is often observed that every time some
mathematical question is answered it generates new
mathematical issues to think about. In this spirit, it seems to me that
new insights in the idea of tiling the plane with convex (no dents or
holes) pentagons might result by looking at the different partition
types of pentagons that can arise. Thus, a {5} ; {5} pentagon is one
where there are five edges all of the same length and 5 internal angles
of equal size (measure) while a {4,1} ; {5} pentagon would have 4 edges
of one length and one edge of another length and 5 angles of the same
measure. There are pentagons of the first type but such a pentagon
cannot tile the plane while there are no pentagons of the second type.
One could make a table of all the possible pairs of side length and
angle measure patterns, rows for side length partitions and columns for
angle size. Since there are 7 partitions of 5 (for example 3,2; 2,2,1,
and 1,1,1,1,1) the table described would have 49 entries and it might be
of interest to study if the table has any interesting patterns. For the
equivalent question about quadrilaterals it turns out that if the
quadrilateral corresponding to the entry in the $i$th row and $j$th column
exists, then the entry in the $j$th row and and $i$th column also exists ($i$
not equal to $j$).

 The question of which convex pentagons tile
the plane is of relatively recent origin. Different mathematicians differ about which
previously suggested lines of mathematical investigation are the most
important, and for what reasons, but here are two problems that have
attracted much attention.

 a. Goldbach's Conjecture, named for
Christian Goldbach (1690-1764)  

 Can every even number at least
4 be written as the sum of two prime (2, 3, 5, 7, .....) integers?  

 While known to be true for many millions of cases, no proof is known
that it is always true.

 b. P = NP? 

 Intuitively, this
question asks whether two collections of mathematical problems consist
of exactly the same questions. One collection consists of problems that can be solved
using an algorithm in an amount of time that is given by a polynomial function of the size of the input of the problem;  the other collection consists of problems where a proposed answer to the problem can be checked in
polynomial time.

 For example, the Traveling Salesman Problem mentioned above is a very
important practical problem and all known algorithms to solve it
optimally do not run in polynomial time. On the other hand, if one
offers up a solution of the TSP as being optimal, one can check if that
is the case in polynomial time.  

 Many would judge the P=NP problem to be much more important than the Goldbach Conjecture, especially if the solution is positive. Finding a
way to solve the TSP in polynomial time would make it possible to solve
problems we can only find approximately optimal more efficiently.
However, it is conceivable that if Goldbach's Conjecture could be
settled in some way, this would lead to progress on the P=NP problem.

As an example of recent mathematical progress, Ryan Williams, currently
at MIT, and others who helped him have made 
a significant discovery

related to issues of the complexity of computation. When designing an
algorithm to solve a problem one typically needs two kinds of resources
- memory and time. Memory is used to store calculations which are made
on the way to solving a problem and time is the "total" time
for finishing the "job." Williams provided new insight into
the tradeoff between using space and time in algorithms to solve certain
problems.

Repositories of progress

 In this
digital age where information comes to our attention in many ways
(podcasts, TV, radio, books, etc.) it is easy to forget that in the
Egypt of 6000 years ago many of the technologies just listed did not
exist. The Egyptians had a written language, hieroglyphics and later
other systems. The famous Rosetta stone helped scholars understand
ancient scripts because the same information on that physical stone was
written down in several different scripts. We take for granted cell
and other kinds of phones and computer screens and paper. However, in
ancient Egypt if one one wanted to write something down it was either
chiseled into stone or written out on papyri, which was a form of
paper that was made from reeds. Because the Babylonians used
clay tablets to write their cuneiform script much more of what
constituted mathematics in Babylon compared to Egypt is available today.
Despite the difficulty of understanding what was being recorded on clay
tablets, it is even harder to infer what mathematics was being used from
engineered objects (roads, houses, pyramids, etc.) that have
survived the thousands of years since they were made. It is my
understanding that plans for certain military hardware of less than 100
years of age are not available because machines to read the software on
which these plans exist are no longer available—or perhaps I am
repeating an urban legend—an untrue story that keeps
getting repeated even though untrue. Scholars have turned to journals to
record their mathematical accomplishments and there are now journals
related to dozens of subpieces of the broad area of mathematics
known as geometry (e.g. Discrete Geometry, Computational Geometry,
Algebraic Geometry, Differential Geometry). 

 In terms of volume
of newly published scholarship more and more mathematics and computer
science is being published. Some of this work while new may not
contribute much of "importance." However, sometimes putting
together lots of small results and obtaining more examples of different
kinds in some areas of mathematics provides a platform on which to make
a much bigger leap of progress possible.

 A major development
whose significance is being hotly debated is the development of
artificial intelligence tools (AI) to assist humans in doing and
progressing in mathematics and computer science. While for a long time
now humans have used computers and computation in clever ways to make
mathematical progress in the form of new theorems and conjectures for
results that appear to be true, AI offers what appears to be the
possibility of of giant leaps forward. Could a human request an AI
system to prove the Goldbach Conjecture and could the AI
spit out a genuine proof? Could an AI system report that, "I have
found a wonderful new theorem about prime numbers? Here is the new
result not currently mentioned in the mathematics literature and here is
its proof."

Already AI is assisting humans in
mathematical progress. The downside is that some humans might use AI to
do mathematics and pretend it is their own work when it is not. Some
researchers are trying to require that work generated with AI assistance
be watermarked with a tag that shows that AI was used in
generating the work.

Promoting Mathematical Progress

 In the America of 2026, our society should and can do
more to educate its citizens in the myriad benefits that putting the
mathematical knowledge attained by people from around the globe
can make for human societies. We should and can do more to promote
mathematical progress, for doing so will lead to better lives for all
humankind.

References

 Alonso, O. (2009).
Making sense of definitions in geometry: 
 Metric-combinatorial
approaches to classifying triangles and 
 quadrilaterals. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Teachers 
 College, Columbia University of New
York City, NY. 

 Alonso, O. and J. Malkevitch, (2013)
Classifying Triangles and 
 Quadrilaterals. NCTM Mathematics Teacher
Journal, (March, 
 2013 issue), 06 (7), 541-548 3 

 Beineke,
L. and B. Toft, R. Wilson, Milestones in Graph Theory A century of
Progress, American Mathematical Society, 2025.

Gowers,
G.T. Mathematics A Very Short History, Oxford U. Press, 2002.

Grünbaum, B., (1995). The angle-side reciprocity of quadrangles.

 Geombinatorics, 4, 115-118. 

 B. Grünbaum, Side-angle
reciprocity – a survey. Geombinatorics, 2 (2011) 55-62.

Rao, Michael., Exhaustive search of convex pentagons which tile the
plane, arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00274 (2017).

Dedication

Dedicated to the memory of my friend and mentor Claudi Alsina
(1952-2025) distinguished geometer, mathematics educator and author of
splendid mathematics books.

Image by Victoria Alsina, Wikipedia. 
CC BY-SA 4.0

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like this:
Like

Loading…

2026-02-01

Previous Post: 
Information, Insight, and the Problem With Parameters
Next Post: 
How to Untwist Your Fractions

Leave a Reply 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.

Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*

HTML tags are not allowed.
Name 
*

Email 
*

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

85,090 Spambots Blocked by 
Simple Comments

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.
 Notify me of followup comments via e-mail. You can also 
subscribe
 without commenting.

JavaScript must be turned on to leave a comment.

Search
Subscribe to Feature Column via Email

Enter your email address to subscribe to Feature Column and receive notifications of new posts by email.

							Email Address						

							Subscribe						

Recent Posts
Another Look at Circles and Squares

The Shapley Value, or How to Split a Bill in n! Easy Steps

The Story Your Ballot Doesn’t Tell

Weekly Maintenance Message

Puzzling Like the Seventeenth Century

Categories

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Adam A. Smith

Adriana Salerno

Algebra and Number Theory

Allechar Serrano López

Anil Venkatesh

Anna Haensch

Archive

Audrey St. John

Bevin Maultsby

Bianca Thompson

Bill Casselman

Colm Mulcahy

Courtney Gibbons

David Austin

Deepayan Sarkar

Diana Davis

Discrete Math and Combinatorics

Étienne Ghys

Geometry and Topology

Guillermo Fereyra

History of mathematics

Holley Friedlander

Jessica Sidman

John Eggers

Joseph Malkevitch

Josh Leys

Math and Arts/Humanities

Math and Social Sciences

Math and Technology

Math and the Sciences

Mathematics and Biology

Moira Chas

Noah Giansiracusa

Patrick Ion

Probability and Statistics

Real and Complex Analysis

Sara Chari

Sara Stoudt

Sarah Wolff

Steven H. Weintraub

Sunil Chebolu

Tamsyn Morrill

Teaching and Learning Mathematics

Tony Phillips

Uncategorized

Ursula Whitcher

Tags
5G

Alan Turing

algebraic geometry

ams

astronauts

Branko Grünbaum

cantor set

chess

Claude Shannon

computability

cryptography

Desargues

economics

elliptic curves

epidemic

Euclidean geometry

feature column history

games

game theory

generating functions

genetics

Geoffrey Colin Shephard

herd immunity

Higgs boson

information theory

lattices (groups)

Lie groups

Machine learning

measles

medieval

partitions

periods

persi diaconis

physics

poetry

polytopes and polyhedra

primes

probability

SEIR model

statistics

string theory

tic-tac-toe

tilings

video games

voting

Meta

Log in

Entries feed

Comments feed

WordPress.org

					 Designed using 
Hoot Business
. Powered by 
WordPress
.				

%d

