

Mathematics Emeritus Professor Receives 2026 Steele Prize for Mathematical Exposition - Department of Mathematics

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Accessibility

Events

Libraries

Maps

Departments

ConnectCarolina

UNC Search

Department of Mathematics

College of Arts and Sciences

Submit Search

Home
 / 
Math News
 / 
Mathematics Emeritus Professor Receives 2026 Steele Prize for Mathematical Exposition

Mathematics Emeritus Professor Receives 2026 Steele Prize for Mathematical Exposition

The Department of Mathematics wants to congratulate Michael E. Taylor! He is a William R. Kenan Jr. Professor of emeritus and has been awarded the 2026 Leroy P. Steele Prize for Mathematical Exposition for his three-volume treatise “Partial Differential Equations.”

The books, published in 1996 as volumes 115–117 of Springer Verlag’s Applied Mathematical Sciences series, are widely regarded as foundational works in the field of partial differential equations. The Steele Prize, which offers a $5,000 award, honors outstanding mathematical exposition in books, surveys, or research papers. Jason Metcalfe said, “The impact of Taylor’s works cannot be overstated.”

Metcalfe added, “His PDE text is, in my opinion, one of two absolutely foundational treatises on the subject.”

Now in their third edition, the volumes provide a comprehensive account of the theory of partial differential equations and their connections to physics, classical analysis, probability, and geometry.

In a SIAM Review, Peter Lax predicted that the books would be “read by several generations of readers eager to learn the modern theory of partial differential equations of mathematical physics.” Taylor said he was “deeply honored to receive this recognition for my PDE books.”

He noted that the books were “a long time in the making,” and credited former students Anna Mazzucato and Martin Dindos, along with colleagues including Jeff Cheeger and Andrew Majda. “Producing them has been a pleasure, as has been the feeling that colleagues have found them useful,” Taylor said. Taylor served as William R. Kenan Jr. Professor of Mathematics from 1987 until his retirement in 2023. He expressed hope that “students and researchers continue to find stimulation in these volumes.”

