 body fails to produce enough healthy hemoglobin ; while in sickle cell disease, defective hemoglobin causes red blood cells to become stiff, sticky and sickle-shaped. But people who produce elevated levels of fetal form of hemoglobin as adults, rather than switching entirely to adult hemoglobin , have much milder forms of the diseases. This presented a tantalizing possibility for translational medicine: genetically switching fetal hemoglobin production back on, and so mitigating disease symptoms. Thein mapped the trait of persistent fetal hemoglobin production to chromosome 2 , and subsequently identified the gene BCL11A as the key genetic player. Orkin demonstrated that BCL11A functions as the master repressor of fetal hemoglobin, shutting down its production after birth, and that inactivating it restored fetal hemoglobin production in mice and eliminated sickle cell disease symptoms. His laboratory identified a specific DNA enhancer region that controls BCL11A expression itself, but crucially only in red blood cells, providing a precise and safe target for therapeutic intervention without affecting other cells. The translation of these discoveries into a CRISPR-based gene therapy (Casgevy) that edits this enhancer region in patients’ own blood stem cells resulted in the first CRISPR-based medicine approved for any disease . This work has revolutionized treatment for sickle cell disease and beta-thalassemia, providing a potentially curative one-time therapy for conditions affecting millions worldwide. Rosa Rademakers and Bryan Traynor independently solved a decades-old mystery in neurodegenerative disease by discovering the most common genetic cause of both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease, and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) , the second leading cause of early-onset dementia. Through multi-year, international collaborations, they collected large-scale data from families where both ALS and FTD appeared together; and through painstaking genetic analysis they zeroed in on a key genetic trigger for both diseases. In 2011, their labs simultaneously identified a mutation in the C9orf72 gene. It is an expansion mutation – a repeat of the same six-letter sequence of DNA, occurring hundreds to thousands of times in affected individuals. The discovery represents a landmark moment in the study of these diseases. This single mutation explains about a third of familial cases of both diseases in European populations, as well as more than five percent of cases in patients with no family history of the diseases. It sheds light on the disease mechanisms , pointing in particular to multiple effects of toxic RNA and proteins in brain cells. It has established ALS and FTD – previously considered two largely separate disorders – on a disease spectrum , sharing risk factors and molecular causes. And perhaps most significantly it has enabled genetic testing for affected families, and opened new pathways for the development of treatments for these currently incurable diseases – including at least two therapies currently undergoing clinical trials. While ALS and FTD remain incurable, thanks to the C9orf72 discovery they are now conditions with plausible molecular causes and promising therapeutic targets. Breakthrough Prize in Mathematics Frank Merle ’s work has significantly advanced the modern understanding of nonlinear evolution equations – the mathematical descriptions of how waves, fluids, and other dynamic systems change over time. His work has a particular focus on singularities : points where solutions to the equations surge to infinity. Alone and in collaborations, he has solved several fundamental problems, including proving that certain equations long thought to be well-behaved actually “ blow up ” – become infinite – in finite time. Working on the soliton resolution conjecture (which predicts that any wave disturbance will eventually decompose into a set of stable, shape-preserving waves), Merle and Carlos Kenig, joined later by Thomas Duyckaerts, developed the powerful channels of energy technique coupled with the concentration compactness method . With Yvan Martel and Pierre Raphael, he revealed how singularities form in the KdV type equation (which describes various wave phenomena from shallow waves to rogue waves). Perhaps most remarkable is his work on the nonlinear version of the famous Schrödinger equation from quantum physics. In early work, he made a complete classification of all the ways this equation’s solutions can blow up. Later he proved, with Pierre Raphael, Igor Rodnianski, and Jérémie Szeftel, that the defocusing version of the equation – long believed to be inherently stable – can in fact blow up in finite time. This highly surprising result exploited an unexpected connection to fluid dynamics : it helped to resolve a major open problem, identifying smooth solutions to the compressible Euler and Navier-Stokes equations where the fluid’s density and velocity become infinite – representing a complete breakdown of the fluid description. Throughout his career, Merle’s insights have overturned fundamental assumptions in the field, forged deep connections between mathematics and physics, and opened new avenues toward some of the most celebrated unsolved problems. Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics Across more than six decades, scientists and engineers from three “ muon g-2 ” collaborations, representing dozens of institutions, have pushed experimental precision ever higher in pursuit of a single, very significant number: the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon . The muon is a heavy, unstable cousin of the electron, and like the electron it can behave like a tiny magnet. The physicists are looking to capture how the muon's magnetic strength is subtly affected by the “foam” of virtual particles constantly popping in and out of empty space around it. Measuring the muon’s magnetism and comparing it to theoretical predictions allows physicists 