Séminaire BOURBAKI                                                                                                                 Juin 2026
78e année, 2025–2026, n° 1255


  BASS NOTES OF RANDOM HYPERBOLIC SURFACES OF LARGE
                               GENUS
   [after Hide–Magee, Anantharaman–Monk and Hide–Macera–Thomas]

                                                         by Bram Petri



                                                              Contents
     Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
     1. The geometry and spectra of hyperbolic surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
     2. The bass note. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3. The bulk of the spectrum. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4. Regular graphs. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     5. Random surfaces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     6. A near optimal spectral gap through random covers (Hide–Magee) . . 35
     7. Weil–Petersson random surfaces (Anantharaman–Monk). . . . . . . . . . . . 41
     8. Polynomial error bounds (Hide–Macera–Thomas). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
     References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51



Introduction

   In the last couple of years, multiple constructions of hyperbolic surfaces of large area
with near optimal spectral gaps, which had long been sought after, have been found.
All of these constructions use random surfaces. The goal of this text is both to put
these results in context and to explain some of the ideas behind them.
   We will focus on two models of random surfaces. The first model we will discuss
yielded the first examples of sequences of closed hyperbolic surfaces whose area tends to
infinity and whose spectral gap tends to that of the hyperbolic plane, as proven by Hide
and Magee (2023). This construction uses compactifications of random finite degree
covers of the thrice punctured sphere. After this, we will describe the series of works
by Anantharaman and Monk (2022, 2023, 2024a, 2025, 2026), culminating in the proof
of the fact that near optimal spectral gaps are also typical for a surface of large genus
chosen at random using the Weil–Petersson measure. The most recent result we will
treat is due to Hide, Macera, and Thomas (2025b). Their work gives an alternative
route to near optimal spectral gaps for Weil–Petersson random surfaces and also yields
an error term on the spectral gap that is polynomially small as a function of the genus
of the surface.
                                        1255–02


   There are many other results related to spectral gaps of random surfaces that will
not be discussed in great detail in this text. Some notable omissions are the work
by Calderón, Magee, and Naud (2024) on spectral gaps of random covers of Schottky
surfaces, the original papers on the polynomial method by Chen, Garza-Vargas, Tropp,
and van Handel (2026) and Chen, Garza-Vargas, and van Handel (2024) and the fact
that random finite degree covers of a closed surface have a near optimal spectral gap,
proven by Magee, Puder, and van Handel (2025).
   This text is organized as follows. We will start by reminding the reader of some of
the basics on the (spectral) geometry of hyperbolic surfaces. After this, we will discuss
results from graph theory that have inspired many of the recent developments. Then we
will survey some of the recent history on all the different models of random hyperbolic
surfaces. Of course there are too many connections to draw and some choices have to
be made. These choices are mostly based on the personal preferences of the author and
he apologizes in advance to the readers who had hoped to read about one of the many
related subjects that haven’t made it to the text.
   The last three sections are devoted to the results by Hide–Magee, Anantharaman–
Monk and Hide–Macera–Thomas respectively. It is however impossible to do justice
to these three works in this short text. In particular, we will not attempt to give full
proofs, but will rather try to sketch some of the main ideas. For details, we refer the
reader to the original articles.

Acknowledgement
  The author would like to thank Nicolas Bourbaki for asking him to write about this
series of papers. It has made the author appreciate the many new ideas involved in them
even more and he hopes that this text conveys some of them to the reader too. He also
thanks the Sage developers (2021), Figure 7 was produced using SageMath. Finally, he
thanks Claire Burrin, Hans Mahnig, Joe Thomas, and Nicolas Bourbaki for comments
on a previous version of this text.



1. The geometry and spectra of hyperbolic surfaces

   Hyperbolic surfaces are a classical object of study and many texts have been written
about them, like for instance the books by Buser (2010), Iwaniec (2002), Bergeron
(2016), and Borthwick (2016). This section will present a quick reminder and some
examples of hyperbolic surfaces. This is not meant to be a full introduction, and we
refer the interested reader to the aforementioned books for more details.

1.1. Definitions
  We start with a definition:
                                           1255–03


Definition 1.1. — A hyperbolic surface is a complete Riemannian 2-manifold of
constant sectional curvature equal to −1.

   The most basic example of a hyperbolic surface is the hyperbolic plane. The
hyperbolic plane also allows a short definition, namely it is the unique (up to isometry)
simply connected hyperbolic surface without boundary. A concrete Riemannian manifold
of sectional curvature equal to −1 is usually called a model for the hyperbolic plane.
The upper half plane model
                                                   dx2 + dy 2
                                                                    
                         2                                2
                     H = {z ∈ C; Im(z) > 0} , ds =
                                                       y2
is often convenient for computations and the disk model
                                                    dx2 + dy 2
                                                                     
                     2                            2
                    D = {z ∈ C; |z| < 1} , ds = 4
                                                  (1 − x2 − y 2 )2
is often convenient for drawings because it looks compact to our Euclidean eyes. Both
of these models are conformal. Indeed, because the metric is in the conformal class of
the (incomplete) Euclidean metric, the angles we see are also the angles with respect to
the hyperbolic metric. The geodesics in H2 are half circles orthogonal to R and vertical
lines. In D2 , the geodesics are given by half circles orthogonal to the circle and diagonals
through the origin.
   Now that we have a definition of the hyperbolic plane, we also obtain an equivalent
definition of hyperbolic surfaces. Indeed, a hyperbolic surface without boundary is a
complete Riemannian 2-manifold that is locally isometric to H2 . If we want to allow
totally geodesic boundary, we ask that points on the boundary have a neighborhood
that is isometric to the boundary of a half plane delimited by a geodesic in H2 .
   Another equivalent definition is that a hyperbolic surface without boundary is a
surface of the form Γ\H2 , where Γ < Isom(H2 ) is a discrete and torsion free subgroup
of the isometry group Isom(H2 ) of H2 . This isometry group can be identified with
PSL(2, R) ⋊ Z/2Z. If we denote the generator of the Z/2Z factor by r (for reflection),
then Isom(H2 ) acts on H2 by
     "      #                                         "       #
         a b      az + b                             a b
             ·z =                and r(z) = −z   for     ∈ PSL(2, R) and z ∈ H2 .
         c d      cz + d                             c d
In particular, the subgroup PSL(2, R) < Isom(H2 ) is exactly the group of orientation
preserving isometries. We will only consider oriented surfaces in what follows, so these
are quotients Γ\H2 with Γ < PSL(2, R) discrete and torsion free.
   If we want to allow totally geodesic boundary, we need to consider quotients of the
form Γ\C, where Γ < Isom(H2 ) is discrete and torsion-free and C ⊂ H2 is a closed and
convex subset, preserved by Γ.
   By the uniformization theorem, constant curvature metrics, considered up to
scaling, correspond one-to-one to Riemann surface structures considered up to biholo-
morphism. So we can also think of hyperbolic surfaces as Riemann surfaces.
                                          1255–04


1.2. Examples of hyperbolic surfaces
1.2.1. The Bolza surface and Hurwitz surfaces. — Thus far, our only explicit example
of a hyperbolic surface is the hyperbolic plane, so its high time for some more examples.
We start with the Bolza surface. The quickest way to define it is to say that is
the unique closed Riemann surface of genus 2 that has exactly 48 automorphisms (or
orientation preserving isometries of the hyperbolic metric). Indeed, in general Hurwitz’s
theorem implies that the number of automorphisms of a closed Riemann surface of
genus g is at most 84(g − 1), and when g is fixed, there are at most finitely many
surfaces realizing this bound. If there are surfaces realizing this bound in a given genus,
then they are called Hurwitz surfaces. In genus 2, there aren’t any Hurwitz surfaces
and the Bolza surface is the unique maximizer of the size of the automorphism group.

                                          π
                                          4




   Figure 1. A regular octagon and the side pairings that turn it into the Bolza surface


   Of course, the Bolza surface also admits a more explicit description. Namely, it’s the
hyperbolic surface one obtains by gluing together the pairs of opposite sides of a regular
hyperbolic octagon (so its sides are geodesic segments that all have the same length and
its interior angles are all equal) with interior angles π4 , as in Figure 1.
   The Bolza surface can also be thought of as a triangle surface: a hyperbolic
surface Γ\H2 determined by a normal subgroup Γ ◁ Θ(p, q, r) of finite index, where
Θ(p, q, r) is the group generated by the rotations of orders p, q and r in the vertices of
a hyperbolic triangle with interior angles πp , πq and πr respectively (which exists if and
only if p1 + 1q + 1r < 1).
   In the case of the Bolza surface, we can take (p, q, r) = (2, 3, 8) in which case the index
is 48. Indeed, in general Θ(p, q, r)/Γ acts on Γ\H2 by orientation preserving isometries.
By work of Takeuchi (1977) (see also Section 13.3 of the book by Maclachlan and Reid,
2003), Θ(2, 3, 8) is an arithmetic group, so the Bolza surface is also an arithmetic
surface. For more on arithmetic groups, including their definition, we refer the reader
to the books by Maclachlan and Reid (2003) and Witte Morris (2015).
   It turns out that Hurwitz surfaces correspond exactly to normal subgroups of Θ(2, 3, 7).
In particular, again using Takeuchi’s theorem, these are all arithmetic as well. The
Hurwitz surface of smallest genus is the Klein quartic, the unique Hurwitz surface of
                                               1255–05


genus 3, a hyperbolic surface about which a whole book has been written, edited by
Levy (1999).
1.2.2. The thrice punctured sphere. — Our next example is a non-compact surface of
finite area: the thrice punctured sphere. It follows from the uniformization theorem,
combined with the fact the the automorphism group of the Riemann sphere acts triply
transitively, that there is only one complete hyperbolic metric on the thrice punctured
sphere.




                    −1                            0                             1
                     Figure 2. Building the thrice punctured sphere

   To build it explicitly, we can take the ideal quadrilateral in H2 with ideal vertices
−1, 0, 1 and ∞ and glue the sides together according to the pattern drawn in Figure 2.
Because of the ideal vertices, the sides have infinite length. So per pair of sides there is
a one parameter family of isometries between them that we could use for the gluing and
thus there are two choices to be made. This is what the inscribed disks are for. They
define 4 special points on the sides of our quadrilateral. The gluing that guarantees
that the resulting hyperbolic metric is complete is the unique gluing by isometries that
identifies these special points.
   This is also exactly the gluing that ensures that the corresponding isometries of H2
are parabolic, so the structure near the punctures is that of a hyperbolic cusp. That
is, the punctures have neighborhoods that are isometric to
                                                                *"         #+
                             n
                                      2
                                                         o .         1 1
                         Ct = z ∈ H ; Im(z) > t
                                                                     0 1
for some t > 0.
   In fact, the elements of PSL(2, R) that correspond to the two gluings are given by
                                 "         #             "      #
                                     1 2                     1 0
                                                and              ,
                                     0 1                     2 1
                                         1255–06


which freely generate the level 2 principal congruence subgroup of PSL(2, Z), i.e.
the group
                          !                                                  !
                       a b             a ≡ d ≡ 1 mod N                 1 0
                                                              .
         Γ(N ) =           ∈ SL(2, Z);                               ±
                       c d             b ≡ c ≡ 0 mod N                 0 1
for N = 2. In other words the thrice punctured sphere can be uniformized as Γ(2)\H2 .
Because PSL(2, Z) is the (2, 3, ∞)-triangle group, we are still in the realm of arithmetic
triangle surfaces.
1.2.3. Pants decompositions. — As even the reader who is less familiar with hyperbolic
surfaces probably suspects, most hyperbolic surfaces are in fact not arithmetic triangle
surfaces. Indeed, on a fixed surface of finite type, there are uncountably many pairwise
non-isometric hyperbolic structures, whereas only finitely many of these structures
are arithmetic. In fact, the factorial growth rate of this number is known, due to
Belolipetsky, Gelander, Lubotzky, and Shalev (2010).
  In this section we will sketch how to build all orientable hyperbolic surfaces of finite
area.




                         Figure 3. Four topological types of pants


  We start with a building block (see Figure 3):

Definition 1.2. — A pair of pants is an orientable hyperbolic surface with empty
or totally geodesic boundary that is homeomorphic to a sphere with n punctures and b
boundary components such that n + b = 3.

   What makes these convenient building blocks is that, up to isometry, pairs of pants
are determined by the lengths of their boundary components (where we will identify a
cusp with a boundary component of length 0).
   We can now build hyperbolic surfaces of finite area by gluing together a finite number
of pairs of pants. The only thing to make sure of is that those pairs of boundary
components that we plan to glue together have the same length. We can use any
isometry between such a pair of boundary components for the gluing, so per pair, we
obtain a one parameter family of gluings.
                                           1255–07


   The fact that this construction yields all orientable hyperbolic surfaces of finite area
follows from the fact that free homotopy classes of essential(1) closed curves contain
unique geodesics and that these geodesic representatives also minimize the total number
of intersections. So, given a hyperbolic surface, we can always find a pants decompo-
sition – a collection of simple closed curves that cut it into pairs of pants – by putting
a topological pants decomposition in geodesic position.


1.3. Teichmüller and moduli spaces

   The above discussion implies that if we fix a pants decomposition of a surface, then
we obtain a parameter space of hyperbolic surfaces. Indeed, to every curve in the pants
decomposition correspond two parameters: a length and a twist that records the
isometry we used for the gluing.
   At this point, it may seem most natural to let the twists live on the circle (corre-
sponding to where some base point lands under the isometry). We will however let
the twist be a real number instead. So if γ is a curve in the pants decomposition and
we change the twist parameter from τγ to τγ + δ, then the new surface is obtained as
follows. We open the old surface up along the geodesic homotopic to γ and complete
it so as to obtain a surface with boundary components γ1 and γ2 that we parametrize
with unit speed, in such a way that the gluing “γ1 (t) ∼ γ2 (t) for all t ∈ R” corresponds
to the original surface. The gluing “γ1 (t) ∼ γ2 (t + δ)” then yields the surface we are
after. See Figure 4 for a depiction of this process.



                                                                          δ

                 γ                         γ1 γ2

                                Figure 4. Performing a twist


  An Euler characteristic computation implies that a pants decomposition of an ori-
entable surface of genus g with n punctures and b boundary components contains
3g + n + b curves. This does not count the curves that form the potential boundary
components. In the deformation spaces of hyperbolic surfaces that we will consider
here, we will always assume the boundary lengths to be fixed. The space of hyperbolic
                                                                     3g+n+b−3
surfaces we obtain is hence a space homeomorphic to R>0 × R                       .


(1)
  A closed curve is called essential if it is not homotopic to a point, a puncture or a boundary
component.
                                             1255–08


  This deformation space turns out to be homeomorphic to the Teichmüller space of
the underlying surface. As sets, these are defined as:
                                                                                    
                       
                                      X a hyperbolic surface with boundary              
                                                                                         
                       
                       
                       
                                    components δ1 , . . . , δn of length L1 , . . . , Ln 
                                                                                          
                                                                                          
                                                                                           
  Tg,n (L1 , . . . , Ln ) = (X, f );    respectively, and f : Σg,n (L) → X an                ∼.
                           
                                       orientation preserving diffeomorphism, 
                           
                                                                                         
                                                                                          
                           
                                                                                         
                                                                                         
                                            with f (βi ) = δi , i = 1, . . . , n
                                                                                         

Here L ∈ [0, ∞)n and Li = 0 corresponds to a cusp and Σg,n (L) is a fixed reference
surface with boundary components and punctures β1 , . . . , βn : if Li = 0 then βi is a
puncture and otherwise it’s a boundary component. Finally (X1 , f1 ) ∼ (X2 , f2 ) if and
only if there exists an isometry φ : X1 → X2 that maps the ith boundary component
of X1 to the ith boundary component of X2 for i = 1, . . . , n and such that
                              f2−1 ◦ φ ◦ f1 : Σg,n (L) → Σg,n (L)
is homotopic to the identity. We will write Σg := Σg,0 and Tg := Tg,0 .
                                          3g+n−3
  The identification with R>0 × R                    now goes as follows. We first fix a pants
decomposition of Σg,n (L), i.e. a collection of curves α1 , . . . , α3g+n−3 that decompose
Σg,n (L) into pairs of pants. Then given a point [X, f ] ∈ Tg,n (L), we record the lengths
                                                           3g+n−3
and twists of f (αi ), giving us a point in      R>0 × R              . The lengths are easy to
define, X carries a hyperbolic metric, so we can put f (αi ) in geodesic position. The
twists are more subtle and we refer to the literature for a proper definition. The
coordinates we have just described are called Fenchel–Nielsen coordinates. There is
an independently defined topology on Teichmüller space, which turn these coordinates
into a homeomorphism. We will not get into this in this text and just say that the
topology on Tg,n (L) is given by these coordinates.
   We have already observed that Teichmüller space overparametrizes hyperbolic surfaces.
In fact, taking the twist in R instead of the circle is not the only source of this. Namely,
the mapping class group MCG(Σg,n (L)) of Σg,n (L) – the group of homotopy classes
of orientation preserving diffeomorphisms that restrict to the identity on ∂Σg,n (L) and
also don’t permute the punctures – acts on Tg,n (L) by
          [φ] · [X, f ] = [X, f ◦ φ−1 ],    [X, f ] ∈ Tg,n (L), [φ] ∈ MCG(Σg,n (L)).
The corresponding moduli space is the quotient of this action:
                            Mg,n (L) = MCG(Σg,n (L)) \ Tg,n (L).
We note that punctures and boundary components are still distinguishable in Mg,n (L),
because we have chosen to quotient only by mapping classes that preserve them. We
will write Mg := Mg,0 .
  The mapping class group acts properly discontinuously, but not freely, on Tg,n (L),
so Mg,n (L) has the structure of a (6g + 2n − 6)-dimensional orbifold. When either
n = 0 or L = (0, . . . , 0) this space coincides with the moduli space of Riemann surfaces
                                              1255–09


(potentially with marked points), considered up to biholomorphism. For an introduction
to this subject, we refer the reader to the books by Imayoshi and Taniguchi (1992) and
Farb and Margalit (2012).

1.4. Spectral theory
   Next up, we discuss the Laplacian operator on a hyperbolic surface. On a general
Riemannian manifold M , this is the composition of minus the divergence with the
gradient ∆M = −div ◦ grad : C ∞ (M ) → C ∞ (M ). If M is geodesically complete (as
all manifolds without boundary that we will consider are), then ∆M is an essentially
self-adjoint operator with domain Cc∞ (M ): the space of compactly supported smooth
functions.
   For the spectral theory on general Riemannian manifolds we refer the reader to the
books by Chavel (1984) and Borthwick (2020). We will now give a brief introduction
to the spectral theory of hyperbolic surfaces.
1.4.1. The hyperbolic plane. — We start with the hyperbolic plane. A computation
shows that in the upper half plane model,
                                                            !
                                             ∂2
                                              2   ∂2
                                  ∆H2 = −y ·    +
                                             ∂x2 ∂y 2
and in the disk model
                                                                  !
                                   (1 − x2 − y 2 )2   ∂2   ∂2
                           ∆D2 = −                  ·    +     .
                                         4            ∂x2 ∂y 2
The presence of the inverse of the conformal factor in this expression is a 2-dimensional
phenomenon.
  The spectrum of ∆H2 is given by the following lemma:
Lemma 1.3. — The spectrum of ∆H2 on L2 (H2 ) is [ 41 , ∞).
Proof sketch. — First we prove that the spectrum of ∆H2 is contained in [ 14 , ∞). For
this part we use an argument that can for instance be found in the article by McKean
(1970, page 359). Take any f ∈ Cc∞ (H2 ). For x ∈ R fixed, integration by parts gives
                        f2     2           ∂(f 2 ) dy 2
                 Z ∞                  Z ∞
             1                     1
                                                       
                          2
                            dy   =                ·
             4    0     y          4   0     ∂y     y
                                              ′    2  Z ∞ 2
                                         f ·f
                                   Z ∞                           Z ∞
                                                          f
                                 =              dy ≤         dy ·     (f ′ )2 dy.
                                     0     y            0 y2       0

This implies that
                   1 Z ∞ f2       Z ∞
                                           ′ 2
                                                       Z ∞
                                                           f          2
                                                                   2∂ f
                            dy ≤        (f  )  dy  = −         · y        dy,
                   4 0 y2           0                   0  y2        ∂y 2
integrating by parts again in the last equality. Now we integrate with respect to x and
obtain
            1 Z f2              Z
                                     f         2
                                            2∂ f
                                                             Z
                                                                    f
                  2
                     dx dy ≤ −        2
                                         ·y      2
                                                   dxdy ≤ −            · ∆H2 f dxdy,
            4 H y
                2                H y
                                  2           ∂y              H y2
                                                                 2
                                           1255–10


                                                      ∞       2
where we have used the fact that for y fixed − −∞        f · ∂∂xf2 dx ≥ 0 in the last inequality.
                                                    R

Using the variational characterization of the spectrum, this proves that ∆H2 ⊂ [ 41 , ∞).
     The eigenfunctions of ∆H2 are not in L2 (H2 ), so one way to prove that the interval
[ 14 , ∞) is contained in the spectrum of ∆H2 , is to construct, for all λ ∈ [ 14 , ∞), sequences
of functions ϕ(λ)        2   2                          (λ)
                  n ∈ L (H ) such that ∥(∆H2 − λ)ϕn ∥2 → 0 as n → ∞. McKean uses
approximations of conical functions. Another standard choice is to approximate the
function y 7→ y s , where λ = s(1 − s), by multiplying it with a sequence of appropriate
cut-off functions, see for instance the proof of Proposition 7.2 in the book by Borthwick
(2016).
   There is more to say, but we will move on to the hyperbolic surfaces that this story
is about, namely surfaces of finite area, starting with closed surfaces.
1.4.2. Closed surfaces. — We start with the spectral theorem in the closed setting.
In this text, the definition of a closed manifold will include the requirement that the
manifold is connected, on top of being compact and not having boundary.
Theorem 1.4 (Spectral theorem). — Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface. Then the
spectrum of ∆X on L2 (X) is discrete and consists entirely of eigenvalues
                            0 = λ0 (X) < λ1 (X) ≤ λ2 (X) ≤ · · · .
The corresponding eigenfunctions are smooth and an orthonormal basis of L2 (X) can be
extracted from the set of eigenfunctions.
   In the above, the zeroth eigenvalue corresponds to constant functions. Because our
surface is assumed to be connected, the next eigenvalue λ1 (X) is strictly positive. In
fact, this theorem has nothing to do with hyperbolic surfaces and holds for closed
Riemannian manifolds in general. Likewise, on all closed Riemannian manifolds, the
number of eigenvalues below a given threshold grows according to Weyl’s law, which
on a closed hyperbolic surface states that
                                                 λ→∞ 1
                   N (λ) = # {k; λk (X) ≤ λ} ∼               · area(X) · λ.
                                                         4π
The Gauß–Bonnet theorem implies that the area of a closed and orientable hyperbolic
surface of genus g satisfies area(X) = 4π · (g − 1).
   The eigenvalues λi (X) that lie in the interval (0, 41 ) are called the small eigenvalues
of X. Otal and Rosas (2009) proved that there are at most 2g − 3 small eigenvalues
on a hyperbolic surface of genus g, confirming a conjecture by Buser (1977), who also
proved that there are surfaces that realize this number of small eigenvalues.
1.4.3. Non-compact surfaces of finite area. — The spectral theory of non-compact
hyperbolic surfaces is more subtle. We refer the reader to the textbook by Iwaniec
(2002) for a proper introduction. Here we will just describe the spectral decomposition
of L2 (X), without proof.
   First, we briefly need to mention Eisenstein series. In the proof sketch of Lemma 1.3,
we have already noted that x + iy ∈ H2 7→ y s is an eigenfunction of ∆H2 that does not
                                              1255–11


lie in L2 (H2 ). If X = Γ\H2 is a non-compact hyperbolic surface of finite area, then
we can use this function to build an eigenfunction for ∆X as well. To do this, we note
that cusps correspond one-to-one to conjugacy classes of maximal parabolic subgroups
of Γ. For each of the cusps c of Γ, thought of as a representative in ∂∞ H2 = R ∪ {∞}
for a Γ-orbit of parabolic fixed points, we fix some element hc ∈ PSL(2, R) such that
hc (c) = ∞ and hc conjugates the maximal parabolic subgroup corresponding to c to
                                             "         #
                                                  1 1
                                                             .
                                                  0 1
We will write Γc < Γ for the stabilizer of c in Γ.
 If we now fix a complex number s with Re(s) > 1, then the Eisenstein series
                         z ∈ H2 7→ Ec (z; s) =                   Im(hc · γ · z)s
                                                        X

                                                   [γ]∈Γc \Γ

is a Γ-invariant eigenfunction of ∆H2 of eigenvalue s(1 − s). Because of the invariance, it
can be thought of as a function on X as well. However, it’s not an element of L2 (X). To
turn this function into an L2 (X)-function (but lose the fact that it’s an eigenfunction),
we take ψ ∈ Cc (0, ∞) and define the incomplete Eisenstein series
                                              X
                             Ec (z; ψ) =          ψ(Im(hc · γ · z)).
                                         [γ]∈Γc \Γ

We will write E(X) ⊂ L2 (X) for the closed linear subspace spanned by all incomplete
Eisenstein series.
   In general, E(X) is a proper subspace of L2 (X). A computation shows that its
orthogonal complement is spanned by bounded functions f ∈ C ∞ (X) whose zeroth
Fourier coefficient in every cusp vanishes. Indeed, since f (h−1                −1
                                                               c (z + 1)) = f (hc z) for
all z ∈ H2 , we can write a Fourier series expansion for f (h−1
                                                              c · ) with respect to the
horizontal coordinate. The zeroth coefficient in this expansion is
                                        Z 1
                             fb (y) =
                              c               f (h−1
                                                  c · (x + iy)) dx.
                                         0
                              2
We will write C(X) for the L (X)-closure of the set of bounded smooth functions with
fbc = 0 for all cusps c of X. We thus have the following orthogonal decomposition
                                                         ⊥
                                  L2 (X) = C(X) ⊕ E(X).
The Laplacian preserves this decomposition and it turns out that the spectrum on C(X)
is discrete. The corresponding eigenfunctions are called cusp forms.
   Selberg (1965) proved that Eisenstein series can be meromorphically continued to
the whole s-plane. The resulting extensions do not have poles on the line {Re(s) = 12 }
and the resulting function with parameter 12 + it (t ∈ R) is a generalized eigenfunction
(so not a function in L2 (X)) with eigenvalue 14 + t2 . As a result, the spectrum of ∆X
on E(X) includes the ray [ 14 , ∞) and this is continuous spectrum, i.e. for λ ∈ [ 14 , ∞),
(∆X − λ)|E(X) is injective and has dense range, but is not surjective.
                                             1255–12


  The final source of spectrum is given by residues of Eisenstein series. In the half plane
{Re(s) > 21 }, the meromorphically continued Eisenstein series have finitely many poles
that all lie in ( 12 , 1]. The residues at these poles in ( 12 , 1] are Laplacian eigenfunctions
in E(X). The corresponding spectrum is called residual spectrum. This includes
constant functions, that appear as residues at s = 1.
  We summarize the above in a theorem:

Theorem 1.5. — Let X be a non-compact hyperbolic surface of finite area. Then
                   ⊥
L2 (X) = C(X) ⊕ E(X) and this decomposition is preserved by ∆X . Moreover,
   – the spectrum of ∆X on C(X) is discrete (and thus consists entirely of eigenvalues)
   – the spectrum of ∆X on E(X) contains the ray [ 14 , ∞), which is the continuous
     spectrum of ∆X , and finitely many eigenvalues in [0, 14 ).

   For proofs, we refer the reader to the book by Iwaniec (2002, Theorem 4.7 and
Theorem 7.3).
   Selberg proved, using his trace formula (see the next section), that for congruence
groups Γ (groups that contain Γ(N ) for some N ) the cuspidal spectrum, i.e. the spectrum
of ∆Γ\H2 on C(Γ\H2 ), satisfies a Weyl law. It is however expected that this is specific
to arithmetic surfaces and that in most moduli spaces of non-compact surfaces of finite
area, a generic surface supports only finitely many cusp forms, see the survey by Sarnak
(2003, Conjecture 1).
   Again, there is a lot more to say both in the closed case and the finite area case,
we for instance haven’t discussed the connection with the decomposition of L2 (Γ\G)
into irreducible representations yet (for this, see the book by Gel’fand, Graev, and
Pyatetskii-Shapiro, 1990), but the space here is too limited to go through everything.
1.4.4. The Selberg trace formula. — One of the ways of accessing the spectrum of a
hyperbolic surface of finite area is through the Selberg trace formula. This formula
provides an explicit connection between the geometry and the spectrum of a hyperbolic
surface and can be thought of as a hyperbolic analogue of the Poisson summation
formula (that relates the spectrum and the length spectrum of a flat torus). Because
we will only use it for closed surfaces in this text, we will restrict to that case:

Theorem 1.6 (Selberg trace formula). — Let X be a closed hyperbolic surface, f ∈
                                       R ∞ −i·ξ·x
Cc∞ (R) be an even function and fb(ξ) = −∞ e      f (x) dx its Fourier transform. Then
                  s
                        1     area(X) Z ∞ b
      X                   
                f
                b    λ−     =            y f (y) tanh(πy) dy
  λ∈spec(∆X )
                        4        4π      −∞

                                                  X                    X          1
                                       +                        ℓ(γ)                       f (nℓ(γ)),
                                           γ primitive closed          n≥1 2 sinh(nℓ(γ)/2)
                                             geodesic on X

where spec(∆X ) denotes the spectrum of ∆X on L2 (X) and ℓ(γ) denotes the length of
the geodesic γ.
                                         1255–13


  The left hand side, involving the spectrum of the Laplacian is usually called the
spectral side of the formula and the right hand side is usually called the geometric
side. We already see from the spectral side that small eigenvalues
                                                             q     play a special role in
the theory: they get mapped to the imaginary axis by λ 7→ λ − 14 .
  For the case of surfaces of finite area, we refer to the books by Iwaniec (2002) and
Hejhal (1976, 1983).



2. The bass note

   We now turn to the spectral invariant that this text is about: the bass note of a
hyperbolic surface. If our hyperbolic surface X is closed, then its bass note is simply
λ1 (X): the smallest non-zero eigenvalue of its Laplacian. If X is non-compact but of
finite area, then there is a choice to be made. We could consider the smallest non-zero
eigenvalue (if indeed there is a non-zero eigenvalue) or the spectral gap – the infimum
of the positive spectrum of ∆X – instead. We will choose the latter in this text. In
particular, if X is of finite area but non-compact, we will abuse notation slightly and
write                                                    
                              λ1 (X) = inf spec(∆X ) − {0} .
This choice also implies that (since we’re always assuming that X is connected):
                             (R                                            )
                                       2
                               X ∥∇f ∥
                                                                   Z
(1)          λ1 (X) = inf       R
                                     2
                                         ; f ∈ Cc∞ (X) such that       f =0 .
                                 X f                               X


2.1. A measure of connectivity
  This a priori analytical invariant contains a lot of geometric information about the
surface. Indeed, it can be seen as a measure of connectivity of the surface X. It’s for
instance related to the Cheeger constant of X:
                        (                                                      )
                             ℓ(∂Y )     Y ⊂ X a subsurface with smooth
           h(X) = inf                ;                                             .
                            area(Y )   boundary and area(Y ) ≤ area(X)/2
This number measures how hard it is to cut the surface in two. Figure 5 shows an
example of what a surface with a small Cheeger constant might look like: it contains a
big subsurface Y that is connected to the rest of the surface by a small interface ∂Y .


                                               ∂Y

                                                           Y



                    Figure 5. A surface with small Cheeger constant
                                            1255–14


  Its connection to the bass note is given by the following theorem due to Cheeger
(1970) and Buser (1982), which in the case of hyperbolic surfaces reads:

Theorem 2.1 (Cheeger–Buser inequality). — Let X be a hyperbolic surface of finite
area. Then
                    h(X)2
                          ≤ λ1 (X) ≤ 2 h(X) + 10 h(X)2 .
                      4
  This inequality also implies that, whenever (g, n) ∈
                                                     / {(0, 3), (1, 1)}, then
                                      inf    λ1 (X) = 0.
                                    X∈Mg,n

Indeed, under our assumption on (g, n), an orientable surface of genus g with n punctures
contains a separating simple closed curve α that is not homotopic to a point or a
puncture. So, using the construction from Section 1.2.3, we can build a family of
hyperbolic metrics Xt on that surface such that ℓXt (α) = t. It however follows from the
Gauß–Bonnet theorem that the areas of the subsurfaces bounded by α do not depend
on the choice of metric and so, letting t tend to 0, we obtain a family of metrics whose
bass note tends to 0. This fact can also be proven directly by using the variational
characterization (1) of λ1 (X). We refer the reader to the paper by Schoen, Wolpert,
and Yau (1980) for more on the relation between short separating curves and small
eigenvalues.
   It’s also known that, when X is closed, a lower bound on λ1 (X) and the systole of X
(the length of the shortest closed geodesic) implies an upper bound on the diameter
diam(X) of X. The sharpest version of this bound, due to Magee (2020), states that
for all δ ≥ 0 and ε > 0, there exists a constant Cε,δ > 0 such that
                          2                  4
            diam(X) ≤        log(area(X)) +     log log(area(X)) + Cε,δ
                         1−δ                1−δ
                                                           2
for all closed hyperbolic surfaces X with λ1 (X) ≥ 1−δ  4
                                                           and systole(X) ≥ ε. A similar
bound can be derived for the diameter of the thick part of a non-compact hyperbolic
surface of finite area. This is (up to a constant factor) the smallest diameter one could
hope for: due to the exponential area growth, the diameter of a surface is also at
least logarithmic; see the articles by Bavard (1996), Budzinski, Curien, and the author
(2021a), and Mathien (2024) for more details. Magee proved his result using an effective
version of a theorem of Ratner (1987), due to Matheus (2013) that implies that the
exponential rate of mixing of the geodesic flow goes up as λ1 goes up, which in itself is
an indication that λ1 is a measure of connectivity.

2.2. The highest possible bass note
  Since we now know that λ1 (X) can be arbitrarily small in most moduli spaces, the
next natural question is how large λ1 (X) can be. In the non-compact case, our definition
implies that it’s at most 14 . In the closed case, this is not necessary. For example, there
                                        1255–15


are very sharp numerical estimates available for the bass note of the Bolza surface and
its bass note is well above 14 . Indeed, Strohmaier and Uski (2013) proved that
                             λ1 (XBolza ) = 3.838887 ± 10−6 .
It is expected that this is the closed hyperbolic surface with the highest possible bass
note:

Conjecture 2.2. — (a) The Bolza surface uniquely maximizes the bass note among
     closed and orientable hyperbolic surfaces.
 (b) The Klein quartic uniquely maximizes the bass note among closed and orientable
     hyperbolic surfaces of genus 3.

   Using a method called the conformal bootstrap, that we shall not get into in this
text, Kravchuk, Mazáč, and Pal (2024) and Bonifacio (2022) prove global upper bounds
on the bass notes of surfaces of a fixed genus. These bounds are very close to the
numerical values of the bass notes of the Bolza surface and the Klein quartic in genus 2
and 3 respectively, whence the conjecture.
   There are multiple ways to obtain a global upper bound on λ1 (X) for all X ∈ Mg .
Huber (1974) was the first to prove that
                                                          1
(2)                          lim sup {λ1 (X); X ∈ Mg } ≤ .
                            g→∞                           4
This result was generalized by Cheng (1975) with a slightly different argument that also
leads to the more explicit bound
                                             2                    2
                           1     4π                1      4π
                                                      
                   λ1 (X) ≤ +                     ≤ +
                           4  diam(X)              4  log(g − 1)
Using bounds on eigenvalues of hyperbolic disks, due to Gage (1980), the error term can
be improved by a factor of 4. An alternative argument, using the Selberg trace formula,
due to Fortier Bourque and the author (2023, Theorem 8.3), asymptotically improves
the error term by a further factor of 4. Of course, 14 shows up in all of these bounds
because it’s the bottom of the spectrum of the Laplacian on the hyperbolic plane.
   The above leads to the question whether there are sequences of closed hyperbolic
surfaces whose first eigenvalue tends to the bottom of the spectrum of the hyperbolic
plane. Indeed, Buser (1984) conjectured that such sequences exist (correcting an earlier
conjecture, also by Buser, 1978).
   We have already mentioned in the introduction that various models of random surfaces
produce sequences of closed hyperbolic surfaces whose first eigenvalue tends to 14 , thus
confirming Buser’s conjecture, and we will spend a large part of this text discussing
these results. Random constructions are currently the only known way of building such
sequences.
   Now that we know that we can approximate 14 it’s also time to become greedier and
ask whether we can construct surfaces whose spectral gap is consistently at least 14 .
It might be possible to do this with random surfaces by getting better control on the
                                        1255–16


distribution of λ1 around 14 , in a similar way to how this was recently done for regular
graphs by Huang, McKenzie, and Yau (2024) (see Sections 4 and 8.1).

2.3. Selberg’s conjecture
  Congruence surfaces are another well known source of surfaces with a uniform spectral
gap. We’ll briefly discuss the non-compact case Γ(N )\H2 . Selberg observed that
these surfaces do not have non-trivial residual spectrum (for a proof, see for instance
Theorem 11.3 in the book by Iwaniec, 2002), so understanding the spectral gap of
these surfaces comes down to understanding the eigenvalues associated to cusp forms.
Selberg’s conjecture states that these have an optimal spectral gap.
Conjecture 2.3 (Selberg’s eigenvalue conjecture). — If we write λcusp   1   (X) for the
minimal eigenvalue of ∆X on C(X), then we have
                                                1
                            λcusp
                              1     Γ(N )\H 2
                                                ≥     for all N.
                                                  4
  The current best general bound, due to Kim and Sarnak (2003), is that
                                                 975
                          λcusp
                            1   (Γ(N )\H2 ) ≥        = 0.238 . . . .
                                                4096
The conjecture has also been verified for small N , by Huxley (1985, Section 6) for
N ≤ 18 and by Booker and Strömbergsson (2007) for all square free N < 857 and
by Booker, Lee, and Strömbergsson (2020) for all N ≤ 226. For the relation between
Selberg’s conjecture and number theoretic questions, we refer the reader to the survey
by Sarnak (2003).
  Huxley’s proof for N ≤ 18 is based on an idea originally due to Roelcke (1956). We
will give a proof using this argument for the surface we discussed in Section 1.2.2: the
thrice-punctured sphere Γ(2)\H2 .
Lemma 2.4. — We have
                                              √
                                          2+     2
                       λcusp
                        1    (Γ(2)\H2 ) ≥          = 0.85355 . . . .
                                             4
Proof. — The geometric input we need is a convenient covering of the thrice punctured
sphere by horodisks. We’ll draw lifts of these horodisks in the hyperbolic plane, like in
Figure 6.
  We’ll take three horodisks of the same area that together cover the thrice punctured
sphere and are minimal with respect to this requirement. The reason that the disks
incident to 1 and −1 in Figure 6 are smaller is that these two points lie in the same
parabolic orbit of Γ(2). The horocycles are completely determined by the intersection
pattern in the picture and the fact that the lengths of the two shorter horocycles are
half the lengths of the longer horocycles.
  A computation yields that the horodisk incident to ∞ lifts to
                                                1
                                                                    
                               2
                  C = z ∈ H ; Im(z) ≥ 1 + √ , −1 ≤ Re(z) ≤ 1 .
                                                 2
                                            1255–17

                                                 1




                              0                                            ∞




                                                −1
        Figure 6. Four horodisks covering a fundamental domain for the thrice punc-
        tured sphere

  Now let f : H2 → C be a cusp form, thought of as a Γ(2)-invariant function with
                Z
                     dx dy                 Z
                                                          dx dy
                  f2       =1        and        ∥∇f ∥2          = λcusp
                                                                   1    (Γ(2)\H2 ),
                F     y2                    F              y 2

where F is our standard fundamental domain: the convex hull in H2 of {−1, 0, 1, ∞}.
We choose some g1 , g2 ∈ PSL(2, R) such that C ∪ g1 C ∪ g2 C projects to our horodisk
covering. We observe from Figure 6 that almost every point in F is covered by at most
two translates of C, so
                             2 dx dy             −1 2 dx dy                  dx dy
                       Z               Z                      Z
       cusp       2
  2 · λ1 (Γ(2)\H ) ≥ ∥∇f ∥        2
                                     + ∥∇f ◦ g1 ∥        2
                                                            + ∥∇f ◦ g2−1 ∥2 2 .
                        C       y       C              y       C               y
Now let φ be one of f , f ◦ g1−1 and f ◦ g2−1 . We have φ(z) = φ(z + 2) for all z ∈ H2 , so
we can write a Fourier series
                                                        an (y)einx ,
                                                 X
                                   φ(x + iy) =
                                                 n̸=0

where we have used that f is a cusp form to exclude the constant term. This means
that
                                                                       2
  Z
            dx dy      Z
                              ∂φ 2 dx dy Z X                     dx dy
      ∥∇φ∥2       ≥                     =        in · an (y)einx
    C        y2             C ∂x     y    C n̸=0                   y
    XZ ∞                    dy    1 XZ ∞                 2 dy
                                                                       1 Z     2 dx dy
=            n2 |an (y)|2     ≥ 1+ √               |an (y)|     ≥   1 + √     |φ|        .
           1
    n̸=0 1+ 2
           √                y        2 n̸=0 1+ √12           y2           2 F       y2
Putting everything together yields the bound 2 · λcusp
                                                  1    (Γ(2)\H2 ) ≥ (1 + √12 ).
   At this point, one might remember the Cheeger–Buser inequality (Theorem 2.1) and
hope that we could use that to prove Selberg’s conjecture. This means that we would
need to prove that h(Γ(N )\H2 ) ≥ 1. The Cheeger constant of the hyperbolic plane in
fact satisfies h(H2 ) = 1, so we’d hope to prove that the Cheeger constant of a congruence
                                              1255–18


surface always exceeds that of the hyperbolic plane. Brooks and Zuk (2002) proved
that this is too much to hope for and that indeed, h(Γ(N )\H2 ) ≤ 0.4402 . . ., for all
large enough N . Budzinski, Curien, and the author (2025) showed that a similar thing
happens for all closed surfaces, that is, h(X) ≤ π2 + og→∞ (1) for all X ∈ Mg . Both of
these results use random decompositions of the surface.



3. The bulk of the spectrum

   In this text we’ll be looking at surfaces with a near optimal spectral gap, i.e. surfaces
whose bass note approximates the bottom of the spectrum of the hyperbolic plane. In
fact, these will be sequences of surfaces whose entire Laplacian spectrum approximates
the spectrum of the hyperbolic plane.
   Before we get to near optimal spectral gaps, we mention a weaker notion of convergence
to the hyperbolic plane, namely Benjamini–Schramm convergence. This is a geometric
notion of convergence that was adapted from graph theory (see the article by Benjamini
and Schramm, 2001) by Abert, Bergeron, Biringer, Gelander, Nikolov, Raimbault, and
Samet (2017) and Namazi, Pankka, and Souto (2014). We say that a sequence (Xn )n≥0
of hyperbolic surfaces of finite area Benjamini–Schramm converges to H2 , if for all
R > 0,
                                    n                          o
                                area x ∈ Xn ; injx (Xn ) ≥ R
                          lim                                      =1
                         n→∞              area(Xn )
In the above, injx (Xn ) denotes the injectivity radius of Xn at x. For instance, any
sequence of closed surfaces whose systole tends to infinity converges to H2 .
  The sequence (Xn )n is said to be uniformly discrete if the minimal injectivity
radius of Xn does not tend to 0 as n → ∞ (in particular, the surfaces Xn eventually
need to be closed).

                         0.08
                         0.07
                         0.06
                         0.05
                         0.04
                         0.03
                         0.02
                         0.01
                                        0.5      1.0    1.5        2.0

                    Figure 7. The density of the Plancherel measure.
                                           1255–19


  It follows from the work of Abert, Bergeron, Biringer, Gelander, Nikolov, Raimbault,
and Samet (2017) that if (Xn ) is a uniformly discrete sequence of hyperbolic surfaces,
then for all [a, b] ⊂ R≥0 :
                                                                  s
          #{k; λk (Xn ) ∈ [a, b]}            1 Zb                         1
                                                                            
                                     n→∞
                                     −→           1[ 1 ,∞) (y) tanh π y −   dy.
               area(Xn )                    4π a 4                        4
                                     q      
                1
  The measure 4π  1[ 1 ,∞) (y) tanh π y − 14 dy is the spectral density of the Laplacian
                     4
on the hyperbolic plane and is called the Plancherel measure (see Figure 7). Gavelli
and Kamp (2024) proved that without uniform discreteness, the spectral convergence
above need not hold.
   Since the support of the Plancherel measure is exactly the spectrum of the Laplacian
on the hyperbolic plane, we have that the number of small eigenvalues of any uniformly
discrete sequence of hyperbolic surfaces (Xn )n that Benjamini–Schramm converges to
the hyperbolic plane is o(area(Xn )) as n → ∞. This is of course much weaker than
a near optimal spectral gap. In fact, one can construct sequences of surfaces that
Benjamini–Schramm converge to H2 that don’t have a uniform spectral gap at all, for
instance using degree two covers of surfaces with large systoles (see for instance Section 5
in the article by Buser and Sarnak, 1994).



4. Regular graphs

   Before we get to random surfaces, we discuss the case of graphs. Indeed, there is an
analogous problem in graph theory to that of (optimal) spectral gaps for hyperbolic
surfaces. This is the theory of (optimal) expander graphs, which is a well-studied subject
in graph theory. For a general overview on expander graphs, we refer to the survey by
Hoory, Linial, and Wigderson (2006) and the book by Kowalski (2019). We will discuss
some recent highlights that have inspired the work on surfaces.
   There are also multiple ways to use a sequence of expander graphs to build expander
surfaces (sequences of surfaces with growing area and a uniform spectral gap), for
instance through covers or triangulations (see the works by Buser (1978), Brooks (1986),
and Burger (1986) and the notes by Breuillard (2014, Appendix) for an introduction),
but these estimates can’t yield sharp bounds, so this is not the route we will take below.

4.1. Definitions
  First of all, given a locally finite graph G with vertex set VG and edge set EG , AG
will denote its adjacency matrix, the matrix on VG × VG given by
                           (
                               #{edges between v and w} if v ̸= w ∈ VG
               (AG )vw =
                               2 · #{loops based at v}  if v = w ∈ VG .
                                         1255–20


In particular, our graphs are allowed to have loops and multiple edges. Since some of
the graphs we will talk about have an infinite vertex set, we will think of this matrix as
an operator acting on ℓ2 (VG ).
  We will restrict to d-regular graphs: graphs such that every vertex is incident to d
edges (in which every loop is counted as 2 edges). In this case the graph Laplacian is
the operator given by
                                    LG = d · Id − AG .
In many ways, this is a combinatorial analogue of the Laplacian on a Riemannian
manifold. Of course, in the setting of regular graphs, any information on the LG can
be extracted from AG and vice versa. As is common in graph theory, we will phrase
things in terms of AG in what follows.
  The adjacency matrix of a graph G is a bounded and self-adjoint operator, so its
spectrum is real. If G is a connected d-regular graph on n < ∞ vertices, then AG is a
Perron–Frobenius matrix with eigenvalues
                           d = λ1 (G) > λ2 (G) ≥ · · · ≥ λn (G).
The top eigenvalue d corresponds to constant vectors. G is called bipartite if we can
bipartition the vertex set VG = X ⊔ Y such that (AG )vw = 0 whenever both v ∈ X
and w ∈ X or both v ∈ Y and w ∈ Y . If G is finite, this happens if and only if
λ1 (G) = −λn (G), which in turn is equivalent to the entire spectrum being symmetric:
λk (G) = −λn−k (G) for k = 0, 1, . . . , n/2.

4.2. Expansion
   In terms of the adjacency matrix, the analogue of the bass note of a hyperbolic surface
is the spectral gap λ1 (G) − λ2 (G) = d − λ2 (G). So if we want to know how high the
bass note can be, we need to know how small λ2 (G) can be. Since the spectrum in this
setting is finite, we could also ask for a bound on the moduli of all the eigenvalues. That
is, we instead ask how small λ(G) = max{λ2 (G), |λn (G)|} can be. For example, it’s the
latter quantity that appears in the equidistribution rate of a random walk on a finite
graph (see for instance Theorem 3.2 in the survey by Hoory, Linial, and Wigderson,
2006). However, the former relates to the Cheeger constant of the graph in a similar
way to the Cheeger–Buser inequality (Theorem 2.1). A sequence of d-regular graphs
                                                      n→∞
(Gn )n is called an expander sequence if #VGn → ∞ and there exists ε > 0 such
that λ2 (Gn ) ≤ d − ε for all n.
                                                                       √
   In the case of d-regular graphs, the number 14 is replaced by 2 d − 1. Indeed, the
latter is the spectral radius of the adjacency matrix of the infinite d-regular tree – the
universal cover of every d-regular graph. The analogue to the Huber bound (2) is called
the Alon–Boppana bound in graph theory and states
                                                                  √
                          (                                )
                                  G a d-regular graph
                  lim min λ2 (G);                              ≥ 2 d − 1.
                 n→∞                 on n vertices
                                                1255–21


Similar error terms to the hyperbolic case are known in this setting as well (see Nilli,
1991; Friedman, 1993).
                                                √
   A d-regular graph such G such that λ(G) ≤ 2 d − 1 is called a Ramanujan graph.
  √ graphs cannot be bipartite. A bipartite d-regular graph G such that λ2 (G) ≤
Such
2 d − 1 is called a bipartite Ramanujan graph. Infinite sequences of Ramanujan
graphs and bipartite Ramanujan graphs of fixed degree were first discovered by Lubotzky,
Phillips, and Sarnak (1988) and Margulis (1988). These graphs are of degree q + 1,
where q is a prime power (originally, q was a prime, but Morgenstern (1994) extended
it to prime powers). It took a long time before the remaining degrees were achieved as
well. Marcus, Spielman, and Srivastava (2015), partially proving a conjecture by Bilu
and Linial (2006), iterated covers of degree 2 to construct the first infinite sequences
of bipartite Ramanujan graphs in the remaining degrees. More recently, using random
regular graphs, Huang, McKenzie, and Yau (2024) proved that there exist infinite
sequences of Ramanujan graphs in every degree.

4.3. Friedman’s theorem and strong convergence
  This last result fits in a long line of results on the spectral gaps of random regular
graphs. Alon (1986) conjectured that, if Gn,d denotes a random d-regular graph on n
(n even if d is odd) vertices, then for every ε > 0,
                                         √           
                                                        n→∞
                             P λ(Gn ) ≤ 2 d − 1 + ε −→ 1.

This conjecture was first proved by Friedman (2008). By now, several proofs of Fried-
man’s theorem exist. Indeed, also Huang, McKenzie, and Yau (2024) prove   √ a version of
this theorem, with sufficient control over√ the distribution of λ(Gn ) − 2 d − 1 in order
to be able to prove that P(λ(Gn ) > 2 d − 1) does not tend to zero as n → ∞, thus
proving the existence of arbitrarily large Ramanujan graphs in every degree.
   We will not go into the proof by Huang, McKenzie and Yau. Instead, we will
briefly discuss Friedman’s original proof and more recent work by Bordenave (2020)
and Bordenave and Collins (2019) that generalizes the theorem and proves a strong
convergence result.
   Before we do any of this, we need to say what we mean by a random d-regular graph.
There are multiple contiguous(2) models for this. We will restrict to the case of even
degree and use the permutation model in what follows. We will write Sn for the
symmetric group on [n] = {1, . . . , n} and define the random 2d-regular graph G2d,n as
follows. We draw π1 , . . . , πd ∈ Sn independently uniformly at random. The vertex set
of G2d,n is [n] and the number of edges between i, j ∈ [n] equals
                                 
                         AG2d,n        = #{k; πk (i) = j} + #{k; πk (j) = i}.
                                  ij


(2)
  Two models of finite random graphs G1n and G2n are called contiguous if and only if for any set A
of isomorphism classes of finite graphs, limn→∞ P(G1n ∈ A) = 1 if and only if limn→∞ P(G2n ∈ A) = 1.
                                                 1255–22


See Figure 8 for an example. We observe that G2d,n is not necessarily connected. It
however follows from work by Dixon (1969) that the probability that it is connected
tends to 1 as n → ∞.



                                     1       2         3     4          5


       Figure 8. The 4-regular graph on [5] corresponding to the permutations
       (1 2 3 4)(5) and (1 4 2)(3 5) from S5 . We’ve drawn arrows to indicate what
       the permutations do, but the graph is thought of as undirected.


  Other well known models are the uniform model (picking a uniformly random isomor-
phism class of d-regular graphs on n vertices) and the configuration model (taking n
vertices with d half-edges sticking out and randomly pairing the half-edges). When the
degree is even, all three of these models are contiguous (see for instance the survey by
Wormald (1999, Section 4) and references therein). In particular, if Alon’s conjecture
holds for one of them, it holds for all of them.
4.3.1. Friedman’s proof. — Friedman’s proof uses the trace method, pioneered by
Broder and Shamir (1987). The idea is that the eigenvalues of AG2d,n can be accessed
by taking the trace of a high power:
                                                         n
                              Tr AkG2d,n = dk +                  λi (G2d,n )k .
                                                           X

                                                           i=2

On the other hand, we can write
                 n      n                                                          o
    Tr AkG2d,n =
                   X
                         # closed walks in G2d,n of length k based at the vertex v .
                   v=1

As such, one needs good estimates on the number of closed walks in a random graph. It
follows from work by Nica (1994) that in the permutation model, the primitive length
spectrum – the multi-set of all lengths of primitive closed non-backtracking cycles, with
multiplicity – converges to a Poisson point process. This in particular implies that
these random graphs Benjamini–Schramm converge to the 2d-regular tree and that
their normalized spectral measures converge to that of the tree, which is given by the
Kesten–McKay law (see Kesten, 1959; McKay, 1981), the graph theoretic analogue of
the Plancherel measure mentioned
                        √           in Section 3. In particular, the number of eigenvalues
                                    √
outside the interval [−2 2d − 1, 2 2d − 1] is of size o(n).
                                                              √             √
   In order to prove that none at all are in the interval [−2 2d − 1 − ε, 2 2d − 1 + ε],
Friedman does not directly work with closed walks but rather with non-backtracking
walks, the graph theoretic analogue of closed geodesics. So we write
                                               ∞                           
                                                                        (l)
                              Tr AkG2d,n =
                                                 X
                                                       fk (l) · Tr PG2d,n ,
                                                 l=0
                                                         1255–23


            (l)                                                           (l)
where PG2d,n is the n × n matrix in which (PG2d,n )vw equals the number of non-
backtracking walks of length l from v to w. This matrix is given by the recurrence
relation
                 (0)           (1)             (2)
               PG2d,n = Id, PG2d,n = AG2d,n , PG2d,n = A2G2d,n − d · Id
                                  (l+1)                   (l)                        (l−1)
                    and         PG2d,n = AG2d,n · PG2d,n − (d − 1) · PG2d,n for l ≥ 1.
                      (l)
In particular, PG2d,n = pl (AG2d,n ), where pl is a polynomial of degree l that can be
expressed in terms of Chebycheff polynomials. The function fk : N → R can be made
explicit as well, we refer the reader to the article by Friedman (2008) for details; we will
just note that fk (l) ≥ 0, with equality when l > k, for all l ∈ N. Friedman moreover
proves that
                      s             √         k
                         2d − 1 2 2d − 1                            √       k
             fk (l) ≤            ·                and    f k (0) ≤  2 2d − 1    .
                           2d        (d − 1)l/2
  We next analyze the expected traces of the non-backtracking matrices. We have
Lemma 4.1. — There exist functions g0 , g1 , . . . : N → R such that for any fixed d, r ∈ N
there exists a constant c > 0 such that
     
           (l)
                           g1 (l)          gr−1 (l)        l4r+2 · (2d − 1)l
   E Tr PG2d,n − g0 (l) −           − . . . − r−1 ≤ c ·                        for all n ≥ 1.
                               n              n                      nr
   The next step in the strategy is to analyze the functions gj . Indeed, it would suffice
to prove that these functions are what Friedman calls Ramanujan functions with
principal term 2d(2d − 1)l−1 for g0 and 0 for all the others. Here, a Ramanujan function
is a function g : N → R such that there exists a polynomial p : N → R and a constant
c > 0 such that
                       |g(l) − (2d − 1)l · p(l)| ≤ c · lc · (2d − 1)l/2 .
The function l 7→ (2d − 1)l · p(l) is called the principal term of g. We now have:
Lemma 4.2. — Let g0 , g1 , . . . , gr−1 be as in Lemma 4.1. If these are Ramanujan func-
tions and the principal term of gm equals 2d(2d − 1)l−1 when m = 0 and 0 otherwise,
then,
         Xn                 √          k      d
                                                          k 
                                                          r+1       c · log log(n) k
                                                                                  
                         k
       E      λi (G2d,n ) ≤ 2 2d − 1 · √                      · 1+
          i=2                                   2 2d − 1                 log(n)
               (r+1) log(n)
for all k ≤ log(2d/(2 √
                        2d−1)
                              .
                                                                 (l)
Proof sketch. — Being a polynomial in A, PG2d,n has the same eigenspaces as A. As
such, writing 1 for the vector all of whose entries equal 1,
     n
    X                                               k 
                      k
  E         λi (G2d,n )       = E Tr AG2d,n |1⊥
      i=2
                          k                                          k                                         
                          X                        (l)                   X                           (l)
                     =          fk (l) · E Tr PG2d,n |1⊥             =          fk (l) · E Tr PG2d,n            − pl (2d)
                          l=0                                            l=0
                                             1255–24


now we apply Lemma 4.1 and observe that terms of the form pl (2d) = 2d(2d − 1)l−1
cancel against the principal term of g0 (l). Combining the remainder with the estimate
we have on fk (l) then implies the claim.

  If we could prove the hypothesis of the lemma above for√all r, we would get Alon’s
conjecture by applying Markov’s inequality to λ(G2d,n )k − (2 2d − 1 − ε)k , which, when
n is large enough, is a non-negative random variable because of the Alon–Boppana
theorem. However,
                √ as Friedman proves, there exists a universal constant C > 0 such
that when r > C d log(d), the hypothesis is violated. That is, the functions gi are not
Ramanujan in this range.
  What prevents them from being Ramanujan is the presence of tangles; these are
small connected subgraphs of negative Euler characteristic that cause the spectral gap
to be small. These tangles appear with a relatively small probability (that in particular
tends to 0 as n tends to infinity). However, these probabilities are large enough to
ruin the expectations we are calculating. A large part of the work in Friedman’s article
goes into dealing with these tangles. In particular, the goal is to take the expectation
over a subset of graphs that are still of asymptotic density 1 but do not contain these
problematic subgraphs. We will not go into details here, but just note that a similar
problem appears in the work by Anantharaman and Monk (see Section 7).

4.3.2. Representations, covers and strong convergence. — In this section, we will de-
scribe the generalization by Bordenave and Collins (2019) of Friedman’s theorem (which
was in part proved using the strategy Bordenave (2020) developed for his new proof of
Friedman’s theorem). We will not sketch this proof, but we will describe the theorem
statement, because it’s used in the work by Hide–Magee that we present in Section 6.
A new approach, that we won’t discuss in detail but plays an important role in the
work by Hide–Macera–Thomas (see Section 8), to the result by Bordenave–Collins has
recently been found by Chen, Garza-Vargas, Tropp, and van Handel (2026).
  We start with a group theoretic interpretation of the permutation model. We let Fd
denote a non-abelian free group of rank d. If (x1 , . . . , xd ) is a generating set for Fd
(which because of its cardinality is necessarily a free basis), then the map

                 φ ∈ Hom(Fd , Sn )        7−→    (φ(x1 ), . . . , φ(xd )) ∈ (Sn )d

is a bijection. In particular the choice of d random permutations we used for our random
graph also yields a random homomorphism φn : Fd → Sn . Moreover, our graph G2d,n
is nothing else than the Schreier graph for the action of Fd on [n] through φn .
  We can also understand the adjacency matrix in this language. If U(n) is the uni-
tary group of Cn with its standard Hermitian product and permn : Sn → U(n) the
permutation action of Sn on Cn , then
                                 d
                                       perm ◦ φn (xi ) + perm ◦ φn (x−1
                                 X
                      AG2d,n =                                       i ).
                                 i=1
                                             1255–25


The representation permn splits into two irreducible representations

                                  permn ≃ triv ⊕ stdn ,

where triv denotes the trivial representation and is obtained as the restriction of permn
to C · 1 ⊂ Cn , where 1 denotes the vector with only 1’s, and stdn : Sn → U(Cn0 ) is the
restriction of permn to
                                        n            n              o
                               Cn0 = v ∈ Cn ;
                                                     X
                                                           vi = 0
                                                     i=1

and is often called the standard representation.
  This decomposition into irreducible representations also corresponds exactly to the
decomposition of Cn into the trivial eigenspace of AG2d,n and its orthogonal complement.
Of course, this is not an accident. Indeed, the graph G2d,n can be thought of as a
(non-regular) cover of the wedge of d circles G2d,1 . If we write G2d,1 = Fd \T2d , where
T2d denotes the infinite 2d-regular tree, then
                                                               
                                 G2d,n ≃ Fd \ T2d × [n] ,

where Fd acts on the second factor through the map φn : Fd → Sn . In particular,
the homomorphism φn is the monodromy representation of the cover G2d,n → G2d,1 .
Thinking of vectors in Cn (and C1 ) as functions on the vertex set VG2d,n (and VG2d,1
respectively), the eigenfunctions of the 1×1 matrix AG2d,1 = (2d) all lift to eigenfunctions
of AG2d,1 . These lifts form the 1-dimensional subspace of constant functions. The
orthogonal complement are thus exactly the “new” functions on G2d,n . We note this
principle has nothing to do with graphs and that a similar decomposition of function
spaces works for covers of topological spaces in general. We will see another instance of
this when discussing the work of Hide–Magee (Section 6).
  The above discussion implies that if we want to prove a spectral gap, we need to
control the spectral radius
                                                         d                 
                        ∥Anew                                  xi + x−1
                                                         X
                          G2d,n ∥∞ :=       stdn ◦ φn                i
                                                         i=1                    ∞

of the self-adjoint matrix Anew
                             G2d,n , where we have linearly extended stdn ◦ φn to the group
ring C[Fd ] – the ring of formal finite linear combinations of elements of Fd . We need the
following definition, in which U(H) denotes the group of unitary operators on a Hilbert
space H:
                                                                                   
Definition 4.3. — Let Γ be a countable group and let ρn : Γ → U(Hn )             be a se-
                                                                             n≥1
quence of representations on a sequence of Hilbert spaces Hn . We say that ρn converges
strongly to a representation ρ : Γ → U (H) on a Hilbert space H if, for all x ∈ C[Γ],

                                lim ∥ρn (x)∥∞ = ∥ρ(x)∥∞ .
                                n→∞
                                                     1255–26


If the representations ρn are random we say the sequence converges strongly in
probability to ρ : Γ → U(H) if, for all x ∈ C[Γ] and all ε > 0,
                                                                        
                           lim P
                          n→∞
                                         ∥ρn (x)∥∞ − ∥ρ(x)∥∞ < ε = 1.

   The case that is of interest to us is when the limit is the left regular representation
of Γ. This is the representation ρreg. : Γ → U(ℓ2 (Γ)) given by
                                  
                       ρreg. (γ) · f (η) = f (γ −1 · η),        γ, η ∈ Γ, f ∈ ℓ2 (Γ).
  Bordenave and Collins (2019) proved the following:
Theorem 4.4 (Bordenave–Collins). — Let d ≥ 2 be fixed and let φn ∈ Hom(Fd , Sn )
be uniformly random. Then stdn ◦ φn converges strongly in probability to the left regular
representation ρreg. : Fd → U(ℓ2 (Fd )) as n → ∞.
   We finish this section by explaining how the theorem above implies Friedman’s theo-
rem. First we recall what a Cayley graph is. Given a group Γ and a generating set S
for Γ, the Cayley graph G(Γ, S) is the graph with vertex set VG(Γ,S) = Γ and edge set
                                               n                             o
                             EG(Γ,S) = {γ, γ · x); x or x−1 ∈ S .
The Cayley graph of Fd with respect to the generating set (x1 , . . . , xd ) is isomorphic to
T2d . In particular,
                                                d
                                               X           
                                       ρreg.         xi + x−1
                                                           i  = AT2d .
                                               i=1
So if we apply Theorem 4.4 to i=1 xi + x−1
                                         Pd
                                            i   ∈ C[Fd ], we obtain Friedman’s theorem.
We however emphasize that the theorem above is much stronger than what we need for
a near optimal spectral gap for random graphs. When we apply it to random surfaces
below, we will need the full strength of the statement.
   Bordenave and Collins’s result is also part of a much longer story on strong con-
vergence for unitary representations. Strikingly, even though we now know, through
Theorem 4.4, that the regular representation of Fd can be strongly approximated by
finite dimensional unitary representations that factor through standard representations
of symmetric groups, we currently don’t have any explicit examples of this. In fact,
even if we don’t ask for the representations to factor through the symmetric group, no
explicit sequences are known. We refer to the surveys by Magee (2025) and van Handel
(2025) for more on this.


5. Random surfaces

   Random surfaces have been around in the mathematical physics, combinatorics and
probability literature for a long time. One particular model that has attracted a lot
of attention is that of random planar maps (random cell decompositions of the 2-
sphere). Some of the highlights in this field are the description of the local geometry, by
                                        1255–27


Angel and Schramm (2003), and the global geometry, by Le Gall (2013) and Miermont
(2013), of random planar maps with faces with a fixed number of sides.
  In this section we will present a brief survey of the history of random hyperbolic
surfaces. We will introduce the three most common models in the order in which they
have historically been introduced, which is the opposite order to that in which the near
optimal spectral gaps for them were proved. Towards the end of this section, we discuss
some alternative models.

5.1. Random Belyı̆ surfaces
5.1.1. The model. — The first model of random hyperbolic surfaces was defined by
Brooks and Makover (2004). In this model, the first step is to randomly glue together
2n ideal hyperbolic triangles without shear (this can be defined by requiring that the
tangency points of the maximal inscribed disks match up, like in Section 1.2.2) into a
surface Sn with cusps. Figure 9 shows a sample for n = 3. The gluings themselves are
determined by the shear condition, so the only randomness comes from the combinatorics
of the triangulation. The model Brooks and Makover use for this is often called the
configuration model: the sides of the triangles are labeled with the numbers 1, . . . , 6n
and the combinatorics of the gluing is determined by a uniformly random perfect
matching (a set partition into pairs) on [6n].




            Figure 9. Gluing ideals triangles into a surface without boundary.

  Afterwards, we compactify Sn so as to obtain a surface S n . To do this, we observe
that the cusps admit neighborhoods that are conformally equivalent to punctured disks
in the complex plane and one can simply add the punctures in. This yields a closed
Riemann surface and hence, using the uniformization theorem, a constant curvature
metric.
  As observed by Brooks and Makover (2001a), this model can also be described as a
random cover model. To see this, we recall that as abstract groups
                  PSL(2, Z) ≃ (Z/2Z) ∗ (Z/3Z) = ⟨τ, σ| τ 2 = σ 3 = 1⟩
                                              1255–28


where “∗” denotes a free product. As such, we can build a random cover of the modular
curve PSL(2, Z)\H2 using a random homomorphism to a symmetric group, in the same
way we did for graphs. In order to have these covers be surfaces (as opposed to orbifolds),
we build a random homomorphism φn : PSL(2, Z) → S6n by sending τ to a uniformly
random fixed point free involution (so a product of 3n distinct 2-cycles) and σ to a
uniformly random permutation of order three without fixed point (so a product of 2n
distinct 3-cycles). This guarantees that the torsion doesn’t lift to the surface
                                                               
                                  Sn = PSL(2, Z)\ H2 × [6n] ,
where PSL(2, Z) acts on [6n] through φn . We’re using the same notation because
distribution of this surface Sn is the same as that of the cusped surface Sn we defined
before.
   When we compactify Sn and PSL(2, Z)\H2 , the cover Sn → PSL(2, Z)\H2 turns into
a branched cover, branched over at most three points (coming from the two cone points
and the cusp). By Belyı̆’s theorem (1979), the set of surfaces that admit such a cover
are exactly the curves that can be defined over Q, a dense set among all Riemann
surfaces (see the survey by Jones and Singerman (1996) for more on this). This means
that the most interesting surfaces are the compactifications S n . Indeed, the set of all
non-compact surfaces that the model generates intersect every moduli space only in a
finite number of points.
   In order to understand the geometry of the surfaces S n , one needs to be able to
compare the geometry of the non-compact surfaces Sn , whose geometry is entirely
encoded by the combinatorics of the triangulation, and the geometry of their compactifi-
cations S n . Brooks (1999) proved effective comparison theorems for the geometry away
from the cusps and their images before and after compactification that can be used to
do this.
5.1.2. Results. — Now we first need to understand the topology of S n . It follows from
classical results on the configuration model by Bollobás (1981) and Wormald (1981) that
the surface S n is connected with high probability as n → ∞(3) . Brooks and Makover
(2004) proved that with high probability the genus of Sn is close to its maximal value
 n+1
  2
     . Gamburd (2006) refined this result and obtained very precise estimates on the
distribution of the genus. He did so by applying a famous lemma by Diaconis and
Shahshahani (1981) to the distribution of φn (στ ), which describes how the cusp of
PSL(2, Z)\H2 lifts to Sn . All this in particular implies that S n is typically hyperbolic.
    The first results on the geometry are by Brooks and Makover (2004), who proved
that their random surfaces are expanders. They proved that there exist constants
C1 , C2 , C3 , C4 > 0 such that
      diam(S n ) ≤ C1 · log(n),    λ1 (S n ) ≥ C2 ,   h(S n ) > C3   and systole(S n ) > C4 ,

(3)
  We will say that a sequence of events (An )n hold with high probability as n → ∞ if P(An ) → 1 as
n → ∞.
                                        1255–29


with high probability as n → ∞. All of these bounds have since been sharpened.
Budzinski, Curien, and the author (2021b) proved that the diameter is asymptotic to
2 log(n) in probability as n → ∞, the author (2017) and Thäle and the author (2018)
proved that the primitive length spectrum – the multi-set of lengths of primitive closed
geodesics on S n – converges to a Poisson point process. This also implies uniform
discreteness and Benjamini–Schramm convergence of these surfaces, see the survey by
Raimbault (2014). Shen and Wu (2023, 2025b) proved that the Cheeger constant is at
       3
most 2π  + o(1) and the spectral gap tends to 14 , as n → ∞, using methods close to those
of Hide and Magee (2023) for the latter. Finally, Naud (2023) proved a general criterion
for the convergence of the normalized ζ-regularized determinant of the Laplacian to a
universal value, that in particular applies to this model of random surfaces.

5.2. Weil–Petersson random surfaces
5.2.1. The model. — The second model we will treat is that of surfaces sampled using
the Weil–Petersson volume form on Mg for g ≥ 2. Wolpert (1982) proved that, for any
pants decomposition P of a closed surface of genus g, the symplectic form
                                     X
                                           dℓα ∧ dτα
                                     α∈P

coincides with the symplectic form coming from the Weil–Petersson Kähler form on
Teichmüller space, the definition of which we will not discuss in this text. Wolpert’s
theorem implies that the volume form ∧α∈P (dℓα ∧ dτα ) defines a mapping class group
invariant volume form on Teichmüller space and thus a volume on any moduli space
of closed surfaces. We will denote the associated volume measure by volWP . The total
Weil–Petersson volume of moduli space is finite, which allows us to define a probability
measure, by normalizing the Weil–Petersson volume measure. We will write Xg ∈ Mg
for a random surface distributed according to this measure. Similar volume forms
can be defined on moduli spaces of hyperbolic surfaces with cusps and/or boundary.
These forms coincide with the symplectic form defined by Goldman (1984). For more
background on the Weil–Petersson metric, we refer the reader to the books by Imayoshi
and Taniguchi (1992) and Wolpert (2010).
   What sets this model apart among the three models of random surfaces we describe in
this text is that the support of the corresponding probability measure is all hyperbolic
surfaces of a given topology. We note that there are other natural such models that are
currently poorly understood, like for instance the model coming from the Weil–Petersson
measure multiplied by the Mirzakhani function (see for instance Arana-Herrera and
Athreya, 2020).
5.2.2. Results. — The geometry of Weil–Petersson random surfaces was first inves-
tigated by Guth, Parlier, and Young (2011) and Mirzakhani (2013). Guth, Parlier
and Young used them to prove an existence result, namely that, for every ε > 0 and
every g large enough, there exist hyperbolic surfaces of genus g that do not admit a
pants decomposition of total length ≤ g 7/6−ε . This is still the best known lower bound
                                                            1255–30


on the maximal minimal total pants length of a surface of genus g. The best known
upper bound follows from work by Parlier (2024) on the constant in Bers’s theorem
(1974). The resulting bound states that every closed hyperbolic surface admits a pants
decomposition of total length at most 12π(g − 1)2 .
   Mirzakhani used the integration techniques she developed as a part of her thesis
(see the article by Mirzakhani (2007a) for the beginning of this story) to study the
random surfaces Xg . A priori, one might want to simply integrate functions over some
fundamental domain Fg ⊂ Tg for the corresponding mapping class groups. However, no
sequence of fundamental domains is known that is also easy to describe.
   Mirzakhani overcame this difficulty by proving the Mirzakhani integration for-
mula. In order to state it, suppose that Γ = (γ1 , . . . , γk ) is a collection of disjoint,
pairwise non-homotopic, essential (see footnote 1) simple closed curves on Σg,n (L) and
that F : [0, ∞)k → R is a function. Then we define F Γ : Mg,n (L) → R by
             F Γ (X) =
                                        X
                                                            F (ℓα1 (X), . . . , ℓαk (X)),       X ∈ Mg,n (L).
                            (α1 ,...,αk )∈MCG(Σg,n (L))·Γ

For example, if γ ⊂ Σg is a non-separating simple closed curve and F = 1[0,L] is the
indicator function of the interval [0, L], then F γ : Mg → N is the function that assigns
the number of non-separating simple closed geodesics of length at most L on X to
X ∈ Mg .
  Using a covering argument, Mirzakhani proved an integration formula for functions
of the form above. In this theorem, MΣg,n (L),Γ (L1 , . . . , Ln , x1 , x1 , . . . , xk , xk ) denotes
the moduli space of hyperbolic metrics on Σg,n (L) − Γ, in which the two boundary
components coming from γi both have length xi for i = 1, . . . , k. If Σg,n (L) − Γ
has multiple connected components, then MΣg,n (L),Γ (L, x, x) is a product over these
components. Mirzakhani proved:

Theorem 5.1 (Mirzakhani Integration Formula). — Let F : [0, ∞)k → R, let L ∈
[0, ∞)n and let Γ = (γ1 , . . . , γk ) be a collection of disjoint pairwise non-homotopic,
essential simple closed curves on Σg,n (L). Then
      Z
          F Γ (X) dvolWP (X)
       Mg,n (L)
             Z                                                                             
      = CΓ        F (x) · volWP MΣg,n (L),Γ (L1 , . . . , Ln , x1 , x1 , . . . , xk , xk ) x1 · · · xk dx1 · · · dxk .
             [0,∞)k

Here CΓ is a constant that depends on Γ alone(4) .

   This theorem can be thought of as a hyperbolic version of the integration formula
for the moduli space of lattices SL(n, Z)\SL(n, R) proved by Siegel (1945). This is one
of multiple surprising similarities to the moduli space of lattices, Indeed, the moduli

(4)
      For a precise description of this constant, we refer to the survey by Wright (2020).
                                          1255–31


space of hyperbolic surfaces is not a locally homogeneous space so there is no reason to
expect it should behave similarly.
   Mirzakhani (2007a, 2008, 2007b) combined this formula with her generalization of
McShane’s identity and multiple other beautiful ideas to derive recurrences for Weil–
Petersson volumes, prove asymptotic counting results for the number of simple closed
geodesics on a hyperbolic surface and re-prove Witten’s conjecture on intersection
numbers of tautological classes on the moduli space of curves. Mirzakhani and Zograf
(2015) used Mirzakhani’s recurrences to derive an asymptotic equivalent for volWP (Mg,n )
as g → ∞ that plays an important role in nearly all the papers on Weil–Petersson
random surfaces.
   For the random surfaces Xg , Mirzakhani (2013) proved that with high probability as
g → ∞, for every ε > 0,
                                                            log(2)
                   diam(Xg ) ≤ 40 · log(g),    h(Xg ) ≥               −ε
                                                          2π + log(2)
and as a result of the latter (using the Cheeger inequality, Theorem 2.1),
                                   log2 (2)
                     λ1 (Xg ) ≥                − ε = 0.00246 . . . − ε.
                                (4π + log(4))2
Mirzakhani’s results also imply the Benjamini–Schramm convergence to H2 of these
surfaces as g → ∞ (see the survey by Raimbault, 2014).
   There has been a lot of work on these random surfaces since. We start with lengths of
geodesics. Mirzakhani and the author (2019) proved that, like for random Belyı̆ surfaces,
the primitive length spectrum converges to a Poisson point process as the genus tends
to infinity, but with a different density (that also appears in a combinatorial setting, see
Janson and Louf, 2023; Barazer, Giacchetto, and Liu, 2025). Lengths of longer geodesics
on these random surfaces were investigated by Nie, Wu, and Xue (2023), Parlier, Wu,
and Xue (2022), Monk and Thomas (2022), Wu and Xue (2025), and He, Shen, Wu,
and Xue (2023).
   The study of the bass note of these surfaces has also attracted a lot of attention.
                                                                                     3
Mirzakhani’s bound on the first Laplacian eigenvalue was first improved to 16            − ε,
                                                                                       2
independently by Wu and Xue (2022) and Lipnowski and Wright (2024), then to 9 − ε
by Anantharaman and Monk (2026), afterwards to 14 − ε, also by Anantharaman and
Monk (2025) (see Section 7) and most recently Hide, Macera, and Thomas (2025b)
proved that, for some fixed c > 0, λ1 (Xg ) ≥ 14 − g −c with high probability as g → ∞
(see Section 8).
   There are other spectral questions to ask as well. Monk (2022) made the Benjamini–
Schramm convergence and the resulting spectral convergence of the surfaces Xg more
effective and Gong (2024) and Monk and Stan (2025) extended this to Laplacians
twisted by a harmonic 1-form and Dirac operators respectively. Le Masson and Sahlsten
(2017) proved a quantum ergodicity theorem for these random surfaces and Gilmore,
Le Masson, Sahlsten, and Thomas (2021) and Thomas (2022) studied delocalization
                                        1255–32


for eigenfunctions. The latter group for instance proved that the L∞ -norm of any L2 -
normalized eigenfunction corresponding to an eigenvalue in a fixed window [a, b] ⊂ (0, ∞)
is at most O(log(g)−1/2 ).
   The criterion for the convergence of the determinant of the Laplacian by Naud (2023)
applies here too and He and Wu (2025) also studied the expected determinant. Rudnick
(2023), Rudnick and Wigman (2023), Marklof and Monk (2024), and Rudnick and
Wigman (2025) showed that, when first sending the genus and then the energy window
to infinity, certain statistics for eigenvalues in the given window behave like those of
large GOE and GUE matrices.
   Finally, we can add cusps to the picture. Hide (2023b) and He, Wu, and Xue (2026)
studied the effect on the first eigenvalue of adding a limited number of cusps to the
random surfaces. If instead of the genus, we let the number of cusps tend to infinity,
the geometry and spectra of these random surfaces starts behaving very differently, see
the works by Hide and Thomas (2025a,b), Shen and Wu (2025a), and Budd and Curien
(2025). These works prove that there are many small eigenvalues and the surfaces admit
a scaling limit, which is a Brownian map, just like for random planar maps. We can
also let the number of cusps and the genus tend to infinity at the same time. Budd and
Lions (2025), using work by Budd and Zonneveld (2024), showed that when the number
of cusps tends to infinity sufficiently quickly and only certain geodesics – called tight
geodesics – are counted, their statistics on surfaces of large genus with many cusps are
the same as on closed surfaces of large genus.

5.3. Random finite degree covers
5.3.1. The model. — The third model we will discuss is that of random covers. This
is the analogue of the permutation model for random regular graphs. In general, a
random cover of a nice enough space X with a finitely generated fundamental group
Γ = π1 (X, x) can be built by choosing a homomorphism φn ∈ Hom(Γ, Sn ) uniformly at
random and setting
                                  Xn = Γ \ ( X
                                             f × [n]),

where X f denotes the universal cover of X and where the action on [n] is through φ .
                                                                                         n
Indeed, because Γ is finitely generated, Hom(Γ, Sn ) is finite and thus we have a well-
defined uniform probability measure on it. In general, saying anything about these
random covers is very difficult. Even just estimating #Hom(Γ, Sn ) is a notoriously
hard problem. We refer to the book by Lubotzky and Segal (2003) for more on this
problem in general.
  In our setting, the base will be an orientable hyperbolic surface of finite area. In
particular, the fundamental group Γ will either be a non-abelian free group or a surface
group. In the former case, the probability space is exactly the same as in the permutation
model (see Section 4.3). That is, as sets we can make the identification Hom(Fr , Sn ) =
Srn . Figure 10 shows an example of a cover of the thrice punctured sphere (so Γ ≃ F2 )
defined by a homomorphism φ5 : Γ → S5 .
                                              1255–33




                 1                  2               3                 4                   5




       Figure 10. Gluing ideal squares together according to the permutations
       (1 2 3)(4)(5) and (1 5 4 2 3) in S5 yields a 5-fold cover of the thrice punctured
       sphere.


  The closed case is significantly more complicated. If we write Γg for the fundamental
group of an orientable surface of genus g, then we have
                                n                                         g                o
            Hom(Γg , Sn ) = (α1 , . . . , αg , β1 , . . . , βg ) ∈ S2g
                                                                          Y
                                                                    n ;       [αi , βi ] = e .
                                                                          i=1

Hurwitz (1901) was the first to prove that this can be expressed in terms of the irreducible
representations of the symmetric group:
                                                                                1
              #Hom(Γg , Sn ) = (n!)2g−1
                                                         X
                                                                                         .
                                              ρ : Sn →GL(V ρ ) irreducible
                                                                           dim(V ρ )2g−2
                                                    representation

Lulov (1996) and Müller and Schlage-Puchta (2002) analyzed the sum over the irre-
ducible representations and proved that #Hom(Γg , Sn ) ∼ 2 · (n!)2g−1 as n → ∞ and
Liebeck and Shalev (2004) and Müller and Schlage-Puchta (2007) proved a similar
asymptotic equivalent for more general Fuchsian groups. Note that the 2 in this es-
timate comes from the trivial representation and the sign representation of Sn . The
underlying theorem is that asymptotically, the contribution of the higher-dimensional
representations is negligible.

5.3.2. Results. — The work by Dixon (1969) and Nica (1994) implies that if the base
surface X is not compact (but of finite area), then a random degree n cover Xn of X
is connected with high probability and its primitive length spectrum converges to a
Poisson point process. The distribution of the number of cusps of Xn (and thus that of
the genus, through the Euler formula) can be understood in a similar way to the work of
Gamburd (2006) on random Belyı̆ surfaces. If for instance the base surface has at least
two cusps, then this setting is easier. Indeed, because the simple loops around the cusps
induce primitive elements (elements that can be part of a free generating set) in the
fundamental group of the base. This implies that the distributions of their images in Sn
are uniform, which in turn implies that in the large n limit, the expected number of cusps
is asymptotic to log(n) and their sizes are governed by a Poisson–Dirichlet distribution
                                         1255–34


(see for instance the books by Arratia, Barbour, and Tavaré (2003, Chapter 5) and
Pitman (2006, Chapter 3) for a definition and background).
   If the base surface is closed, then the work by Müller and Schlage-Puchta (2002)
implies that Xn is connected with high probability. The length spectrum of these is
also asymptotically Poisson distributed. In order to prove this, new techniques were
developed by Magee and Puder (2022, 2023) and further developed by Puder and
Zimhoni (2024) and Maoz (2025).
   We observe that the Laplacian spectrum of the base surface X lifts to all the covers of
finite degree. So the natural question to ask is what the new spectrum (see Section 6.3
for a rigorous definition) is like. For closed base surfaces, Magee, Naud, and Puder
(2022) proved that, for every ε > 0, with high probability as n → ∞, the Laplacian
                                      3
on Xn has no new spectrum below 16      − ε. So in particular, if the base surface has no
                  3
spectrum below 16 (like for instance the Bolza surface), then there is a spectral gap of
          3
at least 16 − ε.
   Hide and Magee (2023) proved that if the base surface X is non-compact and of finite
area, then with high probability, there is a similar relative spectral gap of 14 − ε. Since
the thrice-punctured sphere has no small eigenvalues (see Lemma 2.4), this yields a
sequence of hyperbolic surfaces of finite area with a near optimal spectral gap. Using a
compactification procedure that glues pairs of cusps together, due to Buser, Burger, and
Dodziuk (1988) (or alternatively the procedure described in Section 5.1, see the work
by Brooks and Makover (2001b) for details), they can be compactified so as to yield a
sequence of closed surfaces with a near optimal spectral gap. Hide (2023a) made the ε
in the theorem effective, obtaining an error bound of size O(log log(n)2 / log(n)). As we
will sketch in Section 6, these results use the strong convergence result by Bordenave–
Collins (Theorem 4.4) as vital input. There are by now several techniques to turn
strong convergence results into near optimal spectral gaps. In the locally symmetric
setting, Magee (2025) gave a representation-theoretic proof that shows how one can
turn a strong convergence statement for permutation representations of a cocompact
lattice in semi-simple Lie groups into near optimal spectral gaps for finite covers of the
corresponding compact orbifold.
  The random cover model is also well adapted to constructing sequences of surfaces
with special properties and with prescribed spectral gaps. Indeed, Louder and Magee
(2025) proved that every closed hyperbolic surface admits a sequence of random finite
degree covers with a near optimal relative spectral gap as well, thus yielding arithmetic
examples. Magee (2024) and Hide and the author (2024) used random covers to prove
that in fact all real numbers in [0, 14 ] can be approximated by bass notes of arithmetic
surfaces.
   The fact that uniform random finite-degree covers of a closed hyperbolic surface have
a near optimal relative spectral gap was recently settled by Magee, Puder, and van
Handel (2025) and Hide, Macera, and Thomas (2025a) obtained polynomial error rates
for the lower bound on spectral gap.
                                        1255–35


  Naud (2026) and Maoz (2026) proved that also for random covers, certain eigenvalue
statistics follow those of large GOE and GUE matrices. Kim and Tao (2026) proved
a polynomial convergence rate for the density of eigenvalues in a fixed window to the
density predicted by the Plancherel measure. Moreover, they proved a polynomial decay
rate for the Lp norms of eigenfunctions.
   Finally, we mention a more topological result. Klukowski and Marković (2024) proved
that random covers have what they call the Putman–Wieland property with high
probability as n → ∞. This property was introduced by Putman and Wieland (2013)
in relation to the open question of whether mapping class groups of closed surfaces of
genus at least three have virtual positive first Betti number.

5.4. Other models
   Multiple other models for random surfaces have been studied for various purposes.
Magee and Naud (2020) and Calderón, Magee, and Naud (2024) studied random finite
covers of Schottky surfaces and proved a spectral gap for their resonances. Mathien
(2024), generalizing a model introduced by Budzinski, Curien, and the author (2021a),
studied surfaces obtained by randomly gluing pairs of pants together and then randomly
choosing their twists and lengths. This can be thought of as a toy model for the Weil–
Petersson measure normalized by the Mirzakhani function, see the works by Arana-
Herrera (2021) and Liu (2022). Liu and the author (2023) defined a model of random
hyperbolic surfaces with large systoles. Moy (2024), Hide, Moy, and Naud (2025), Moy
(2025), and Ballmann, Mondal, and Polymerakis (2025) determined uniform spectral
gaps of random covers of surfaces of variable curvature. Masur, Rafi, and Randecker
(2024) and Bowen, Rafi, and Vallejos (2025) studied the geometry of random translation
surfaces of large genus. Song (2024) and Ancona, Labourie, Roig Sanchis, and Toulisse
(2025) used random surfaces in spheres to show the existence of negatively curved
minimal surfaces in high dimensional spheres. Finally, Wright (2025) proved results on
the geometry of random infinite degree covers of hyperbolic surfaces.



6. A near optimal spectral gap through random covers (Hide–Magee)

  The goal of the rest of this text is to discuss three results on near optimal spectral
gaps, starting with the result by Hide and Magee (2023). In what follows X = Γ\H2 will
be a fixed non-compact orientable hyperbolic surface of finite area and Xn → X will be
a random n-sheeted cover of X, corresponding to a uniformly random homomorphism
φn ∈ Hom(Γ, Sn ), as described in Section 5.3.
  The spectrum of the Laplacian on L2 (X) lifts to L2 (Xn ). Indeed, any L2 -function
on X defines an L2 -function on Xn by composition with the covering map. Such
functions are exactly the functions on Xn that are constant on the fibers of the covering
                                             1255–36


map. We will write L2new (Xn ) for the orthogonal complement of these functions. So we
have
                                               ⊥
                            L2 (Xn ) ≃ L2 (X) ⊕ L2new (Xn ).
The Laplacian operator preserves this decomposition, so its spectrum decomposes as
                       spec(∆Xn ) = specold (∆Xn ) ∪ specnew (∆Xn ),
where specold (∆Xn ) = spec(∆X ) is the spectrum on lifts of functions on X and
specnew (∆Xn ) is the spectrum on L2new (Xn ). We think of all these spectra as multi-sets.
That is, elements are allowed to have multiplicity and these multiplicities add when we
take a union.
  The main theorem of Hide and Magee’s paper is:
Theorem 6.1 (Hide–Magee). — Let X be an orientable non-compact hyperbolic surface
of finite area and Xn a random degree n cover of X. Then for every ε > 0, with high
probability as n → ∞, we have that
                                               1
                                                      
                             specnew (Xn ) ⊂     − ε, ∞ .
                                               4
  In what follows we will sketch the proof of this theorem.

6.1. The strategy
  The main goal of the proof is to build, for every s0 = s0 (ε) > 12 and every s ∈ [s0 , 1]
a bounded resolvent operator,
                                RXn (s) : L2new (Xn ) → Hnew
                                                         2
                                                             (Xn ),
       2
where Hnew (Xn ) is a suitable Sobolev space, such that
                                            
(3)                          ∆Xn − s(1 − s) ◦ RXn (s) = IdL2new (Xn ) ,
thus showing that specnew (Xn ) ⊂ (s0 · (1 − s0 ), ∞).
   This resolvent is built through a parametrix construction. That is, instead of trying
to find an exact solution to (3), one looks for an operator MXn (s) : L2new (Xn ) → Hnew
                                                                                     2
                                                                                         (Xn )
such that                             
                      ∆Xn − s(1 − s) ◦ MXn (s) = IdL2new (Xn ) + EXn (s)
and where EXn (s) : L2new (Xn ) → L2new (Xn ) has operator norm ∥EXn (s)∥∞ < 1 so that
IdL2new (Xn ) + EXn (s) is invertible and we can set
                                                                     −1
                      RXn (s) = MXn (s) ◦ IdL2new (Xn ) + EXn (s)           .
The operator MXn (s) will be built by “patching together” a parametrix in the thick
part of Xn and one in the thin part. For the thin part, coming from cusps, one uses a
parametrix based on the resolvent on the quotient of H2 by a cyclic group generated
by a parabolic transformation. In the thick part, the strong convergence theorem of
Bordenave–Collins (Theorem 4.4) is applied. In order to make this work, the operator
EXn (s) will also need to be compact.
                                                  1255–37


6.2. Building the parametrix in the cusps
  As indicated above, we will build our approximate resolvent using two different
procedures, depending on whether we’re close to the cusps of Xn or not, and patch the
results together. Concretely, MXn (s) will be of the form:
                                 MXn (s) = MXintn (s) + MXcusp
                                                           n
                                                               (s).
We start with the cusp parametrix and recall some notation from Section 1.2.2. There,
we defined the following cusp neighborhoods.
                                                               "           #
                                  n                         o. 1      1
                                              2
                          Ct = z ∈ H ; Im(z) > t
                                                                     0 1
We observe that C0 is a complete hyperbolic surface of infinite area. It follows from a
theorem by Brooks (1985) that the Laplacian on C0 has no spectrum below 14 . Hide
and Magee (2023, Lemma 4.2) give a direct proof of the same fact. In particular, we
have a holomorphic family of resolvents s 7→ RC0 (s) for Re(s) > 12 such that
                                                  
                               ∆C0 − s(1 − s) ◦ RC0 (s) = IdL2 (C0 ) .

  The idea now is to use a cut-off function to turn these resolvents into resolvents near
the cusps. The collar lemma (see Theorem 4.4.6 in Buser, 2010) implies that around
every cusp of the base surface X we can find an isometrically embedded copy of C 1 .
                                                                                        2
Moreover, these cusp-neighborhoods are disjoint. We define
                     χ− =                     χ−       and χ+ =                 χ+
                                   X                                 X
                                               C                                 C
                                C cusp of X                       C cusp of X

where χ−         +
         C and χC are smooth functions that are supported in the isometric copy of C1
in C and that are identically equal to 1 on a neighborhood of ∞. Moreover, χ−   +    −
                                                                            C ·χC = χC ,
i.e. the support of χ−                                    +
                     C is contained in the set on which χC ≡ 1.
   We now define χ±        ±
                    n = χ ◦ πn , where πn : Xn → X is the covering map. This allows
us to define
                                                                        
                            MXcusp
                               n
                                   (s) : f 7→ χ+            −
                                               n · RC0 (s) χn · f ,

There is a slight abuse of notation above: χ−C · f can be thought of as a finite sum of
functions defined on subsets of C0 . We may extend these functions by 0 to functions
on C0 and then apply RC0 (s) to them. When we multiply with χ+ afterwards, we obtain
functions that have a well-defined extension by 0 to Xn .
  Hide and Magee (2023, (4.7) and Proposition 4.4) prove that the functions χ±    C can
be chosen so that the following holds:

Proposition 6.2. — Given any s0 > 12 there exist a choice of functions χ±
                                                                        C such that
for any n and any degree n cover π : Y → X and any s ∈ (s0 , 1],
                                         
                          ∆ − s(1 − s) ◦ MYcusp (s) = χ−    cusp
                                                       Y + EY    (s)
                                                  1255–38


                        cusp
where χ−      −
         Y = χ ◦ π and EY    (s) is a bounded operator on L2new (Y ) whose operator norm
satisfies
                                                         1
                                 ∥EYcusp (s)∥L2new (Y ) ≤ .
                                                         5
  In the proposition above, the constant 1/5 is not optimal but suffices to obtain the
error bound we need below.

6.3. Function spaces
   Before we describe the interior parametrix, we start by making the decomposition
into new and old functions more explicit. First of all, writing F ⊂ H2 for a closed and
connected fundamental domain for X, we can for instance write Cc∞ (Xn ) = Cc,old
                                                                             ∞
                                                                                 (Xn ) ⊕
  ∞
Cc,new (Xn ), where
                 (                                                                                           )
 ∞                       ∞        f is Γ-invariant, supp(f ) ∩ (F × [n]) is compact,
                                  2
Cc,old (Xn ) ≃   f ∈ C (H × [n]);
                                    and f (x, i) = f (x, j) for all i, j ∈ [n], x ∈ H2
and
                                                                                                   
                                                 f is Γ-invariant, supp(f ) ∩ (F × [n]) is         
   ∞
  Cc,new (Xn ) ≃     f ∈ C ∞ (H2 × [n]);                           n                                     .
                                                                         f (x, i) = 0 for all x ∈ H2 
                                                                   P
                                              compact, and
                                                                   i=1

The latter can also be identified with a space of vector valued functions
                     (                                                                             )
   ∞                                           supp(f ) ∩ F is compact, and
  Cc,new (Xn ) ≃ f ∈ C ∞ (H2 , Cn0 );                                                                  ,
                                      f (γ · x) = ρn (γ) · f (x) for all x ∈ H2 , γ ∈ Γ
where ρn = stdn ◦ φn : Γ → U(Cn0 ) (for the definition of stdn , see Section 4.3.2). The
corresponding L2 -spaces L2new (Xn , Cn0 ) and Sobolev spaces Hnew
                                                                2
                                                                   (Xn , Cn0 ) are the com-
pletions of these spaces with respect to the norms
                         Z
             ∥f ∥L2 =        ∥f (x)∥2Cn0 dµ(x) and ∥f ∥H 2 := ∥f ∥L2 + ∥∆Xn f ∥L2 ,
                         F

where we have written µ for the area measure on H2 .

6.4. Building the parametrix away from the cusps
  The largest part of the paper is dedicated to constructing MXintn (s). We will sketch
how this works now.
6.4.1. Resolvents. — We will construct MXintn (s) using the resolvent on the hyperbolic
plane. First we recall that this operator can be made very explicit. Indeed, for Re(s) > 12 ,
the resolvent RH2 (s) = (∆H2 − s(1 − s))−1 : L2 (H2 ) → L2 (H2 ) is an integral operator
given by                                  Z
                                        
                                 RH2 (s)f (x) =         r(s; x, y) · f (y) dµ(y)
                                                   H2
with
                                                1 Z 1 ts−1 (1 − t)s−1
                                  r(s; x, y) =                        dt,
                                               4π 0 (d(x, y) − t)s
                                                         1255–39


where d : H2 × H2 → [0, ∞) denotes the hyperbolic distance function. This can for
instance be found in the book by Borthwick (2016, Proposition 4.2 and Theorem 4.3). In
their original approach, Hide and Magee use this explicit shape in multiple computations,
that we will not go over in detail here.
   Because of the combination with Bordenave and Collins’s theorem below, we will first
                                                               (T )
need to define a cut-off. This will be the integral operator RH2 (s) with kernel
                                                                           
                            r(T ) (s; x, y) = χ0 d(x, y) − T · r(s; x, y),
where χ0 : R → [0, 1] is a smooth function such that
                          χ0 (x) = 1 if x ≤ 0 and χ0 (x) = 0 if x ≥ 1.
In particular, if d(x, y) ≥ T + 1 then r(T ) (s; x, y) = 0.
                                   (T )
  We now define the operator KH2 (s) by
                                                    
                                                              (T )              (T )
                               ∆H2 − s(1 − s) ◦ RH2 (s) = Id + KH2 (s).

It turns out that this is an integral operator with an explicit kernel k (T ) (s; x, y) (see
(5.8) in Hide and Magee’s paper).
                                                                               (T )
   In order to deal with covers of degree n, we define integral operators RH2 ,n (s) and
  (T )
KH2 ,n (s). Their action on smooth compactly supported Cn0 -valued functions is defined
by the kernels
                   (T )                (T )                          (T )        (T )
                  rH2 ,n (s) = rH2 (s) · IdCn0               and kH2 ,n (s) = kH2 (s) · IdCn0
respectively, where we have used the identifications of Section 6.3.
  Above, we defined cut-off functions χ±n in the cusps. We will write
                                                          −
                                                χint
                                                 n = 1 − χn

and think of this as a Γ-invariant function H2 → Cn0 . Because it’s a lift of a function on
the base surface X, all its coordinates are the same and we can think of it as a scalar
valued function.
                                                   (T )
  Hide and Magee (2023, Lemma 5.5) prove that RH,n (s) · χint
                                                            n , where we have identified
              int
the function χn with the corresponding multiplication operator, extends to a bounded
operator
                                (T )                    n             n
(4)                            RH,n (s) · χint  2              2  2
                                           n : L (Xn , C0 ) → H (H , C0 )
                (T )
and likewise KH2 ,n ·χint extends to a bounded operator on L2 (H2 , Cn0 ) such that moreover
                                         
                                              (T )                              (T )
                       ∆ − s(1 − s) ◦ RH2 ,n (s) · χint  int               int
                                                    n = χn + KH2 ,n (s) · χn .

These two operators will serve as our parametrix and our error respectively. That is,
we set
                             (T )
               MXintn (s) = RH2 ,n (s) · χint
                                          n
                                                   int
                                              and EX n
                                                       = K (T ) (s) · χint
                                                                       n ,

for some T that will be determined below.
                                                             1255–40


6.4.2. Random matrices. — The ultimate goal is to use the fact that the random
unitary representations ρn = stdn ◦ φn : Γ → U(Cn0 ) converge strongly to the left-regular
representation ρreg. : Γ → ℓ2 (Γ). We will use a slight strengthening of Theorem 4.4.
Namely, we will need to take matrix coefficients instead of scalar coefficients. That is,
we need the fact that ∥ρn (z)∥∞ → ∥ρreg. (z)∥∞ for all z ∈ MatN (C) ⊗C C[Γ]. In other
words, we have the following consequence of Theorem 4.4:

Proposition 6.3. — Let ρn = stdn ◦φn , where φn ∈ Hom(Γ, Sn ) is uniformly random.
Then
       X                                     in probability            X
             aγ ⊗ ρn (γ)                         −→                          aγ ⊗ ρreg. (γ)                as n → ∞
       γ∈Γ                   CN ⊗Cn
                                  0                                    γ∈Γ                    CN ⊗ℓ2 (Γ)

for all N ∈ N and all sequences (aγ )γ∈Γ ∈ MatN (C)Γ with at most finitely many non-zero
entries.

  Hide and Magee use work by Pisier (2018) to derive this from Bordenave and Collins’s
result. For more on this, see the surveys by Magee (2025, Proposition 3.3) and van
Handel (2025, Section 2.4).
6.4.3. Applying strong convergence. — All that is left now is connecting the dots. For
f ∈ L2 (H2 , Cn0 ) and s ∈ [s0 , 1], we have
                                  Z
              int                             (T )
             EX n
                  (s) · f (x) =              kH2 ,n (s; x, y) · χint (y) · f (y) dµ(y)
                                        H2
                                    XZ               (T )
                               =                kH2 ,n (s; γ · x, y) · ρn (γ −1 ) · χint (y) · f (y) dµ(y).
                                    γ∈Γ F

  Now the observation is that, if F is a fundamental domain for the action of Γ on H2 ,
then L2 (H2 , Cn0 ) ≃ L2 (F) ⊗ Cn0 as Hilbert spaces, through the map
                                                                         n−1
                              f ∈ L (H , Cn0 )
                                         2      2
                                                                         X
                                                                  7→           ⟨f |F , ei ⟩ ⊗ ei ,
                                                                         i=1

where (e1 , . . . , en−1 ) is some orthonormal basis of Cn0 .
  This means we can think of EX        int
                                         n
                                           (s) as acting on L2 (F) ⊗ Cn0 as
                                         int                                     −1
                                                                  a(T )
                                                            X
                                        EX n
                                             (s) ≃                 γ (s) ⊗ ρn (γ    ),
                                                            γ∈Γ

where a(T )     2       2
       γ (s) : L (F) → L (F) is given by:
                                               Z
                       a(T )
                        γ (s) · f       (x) =            kH2 (s; γ · x, y) · χint (y) · f (y) dµ(y).
                                                     F

This is already much closer to something that we can feed into Proposition 6.3. Indeed,
the cut-off using T guarantees that there are only finitely many non-zero terms in the
sum.
  The operators a(T  )
                   γ (s) however aren’t quite finite dimensional matrices. Nonetheless,
Hide and Magee prove that they are Hilbert–Schmidt operators and hence compact.
                                        1255–41


This means in particular that they can be approximated by finite dimensional matrices
and this suffices to prove that, for fixed s and T , with high probability as n → ∞,
                                 −1                                  −1     1
                  a(T )
                                                   a(T )
              X                                X
                   γ (s) ⊗ ρn (γ    )     ≤          γ (s) ⊗ ρreg (γ    ) + .
              γ∈Γ                     ∞        γ∈Γ                       ∞  5
                                         −1                  (T )
The operator γ∈Γ a(T       )
                         γ (s) ⊗ ρreg (γ     ) is conjugated to KH2 · χint
               P
                                                                       n . Hide and Magee
(2023, Lemma 5.2) prove that there exists a T0 = T0 (s0 ) such that for all T ≥ T0 and
all s ≥ s0 ,
                                         (T )               1
                                      KH2 (s) · χint  n ∞ ≤ .
                                                            5
So we obtain that with high probability
                                              int         2
                                        ∥EX     n
                                                  (s)∥∞ ≤ ,
                                                          5
for fixed s ≥ s0 . To finish the proof, Hide and Magee show that the coefficients a(T  )
                                                                                     γ (s)
vary slowly enough as functions of s to upgrade the result for fixed s to one for all
s ∈ [0, s0 (1 − s0 )] simultaneously, with a slight loss and thus produce the bound
                                              int         3
(5)                                     ∥EX     n
                                                  (s)∥∞ ≤ ,
                                                          5
for all s ∈ (s0 , 1] simultaneously, with high probability.

6.5. Finishing the proof
  We now simply observe that the first part of Proposition 6.2 and equation (4) imply
that,                                         
           ∆ − s(1 − s) ◦ MXintn (s) + MXcusp
                                          n
                                              (s)          int
                                                   = Id + EX n
                                                                      cusp
                                                               (s) + EX n
                                                                           (s)
and, by the second half of Proposition 6.2 and equation (5), with high probability as
n → ∞,
                                   int         cusp         4
                              ∥EX    n
                                       (s) + EX  n
                                                    (s)∥∞ ≤
                                                            5
                               int           cusp
This suffices to invert Id + EX  n
                                    (s)  + E Xn   (s) and hence to build our resolvent, as
promised in Section 6.1.


7. Weil–Petersson random surfaces (Anantharaman–Monk)

  The next result we will treat is the theorem of Anantharaman and Monk (2025).
Recall from Section 5.2 that Xg denotes a random closed and orientable hyperbolic
surface of genus g distributed according to the Weil–Petersson measure on the moduli
space Mg .

Theorem 7.1 (Anantharaman–Monk). — For every ε > 0,
                                       1   
                        lim P λ1 (Xg ) > − ε = 1.
                       g→∞              4
                                                     1255–42


   The series of papers proving this theorem have a total of 312 pages on the arXiv
and develop many new ideas. We have fewer pages at our disposal here, so we will
only sketch some of the ingredients of Anantharaman and Monk’s proof in this section.
Anantharaman and Monk (2024b) wrote a longer overview themselves, to which we
refer the reader who would like more, but not all, details.

7.1. The trace method
   The goal is to prove the theorem with an analogue in the setting of surfaces of the
trace method that Friedman used (see Section 4.3.1). The trace of a function of the
adjacency matrix is replaced by the trace of a function of the Laplacian on Xg , which
can be accessed through the Selberg trace formula (see Section 1.4.4). We once and
for all fix an even function h ∈ Cc∞ (R) with supp(h) = [−1, 1] such that     q it Fourier
transform h is non-negative on R ∪ i · R (because the transformation λ 7→ λ − 41 that
            b

appears in the trace formula maps the spectrum of R ∪ i[− 12 , 12 ]) and define, for R > 0,
the function hR ∈ Cc∞ (R) with support [−R, R] by
                                           x
                                           
                               hR (x) = h     , x ∈ R.
                                           R
Its Fourier transform satisfies hcR (ξ) = R · h(R
                                              b   · ξ), so non-negativity is preserved, and
Anantharaman and Monk (2023, Lemma 3.11) prove that for all α, ε > 0, there exists a
constant Cα,ε > 0 such that for any closed hyperbolic surface X and any R ≥ 1 we have
                                                             s
                      1                                                      1
                                                                                      
(6)        if λ1 (X) ≤ − α2 − ε then h
                                     b
                                       R                            λ1 (X) −   ≥ Cα,ε · e(α+ε)·R ,
                      4                                                      4
and thus
                                                          s
                       1                                                       1
                                                                                                    
           P λ1 (Xg ) ≤ − α2 − ε ≤ P h
                                     b
                                       R                       λ1 (Xg ) −        ≥ Cα,ε · e(α+ε)·R .
                       4                                                       4
Because expectations are easier to compute than probabilities, we apply Markov’s
inequality and obtain
                                                                                         q           
                    s                                                                             1
                
                                    1
                                                         E hR    λ1 (Xg ) − 4
                                                                                 b
           P h
             b
               R         λ1 (Xg ) −   ≥ Cα,ε · e(α+ε)·R ≤
                                    4                        Cα,ε · e(α+ε)·R
The quantity on the right can be bounded using the Selberg trace formula. Indeed,
using the fact that hcR is non-negative on R ∪ i · R, all the contributions to the spectral
side of the Selberg trace formula are non-negative and thus
          s                                       Z ∞
                            1
                               
  E h
    b
      R        λ1 (Xg ) −            ≤ (g − 1) ·         y hcR (y) tanh(πy) dy
                            4                       −∞
                                                                          ⌊R/ℓ(γ)⌋                           !
                                                     X                      X                1
                                       +E                          ℓ(γ)                               h(nℓ(γ)) .
                                              γ primitive closed            n=1       2 sinh(nℓ(γ)/2)
                                               geodesic on Xg
                                                with ℓ(γ)≤R
                                           1255–43


So if we prove that the right hand side is significantly less than e(α+ε)·R , we prove that
with high probability, λ1 (Xg ) > 14 − α2 − ε.
  There are however some immediate problems to overcome:

  1. The most obvious problem is that the trace formula has a contribution coming from
     the trivial eigenvalue λ0 (Xg ) = 0. This contribution is the dominant exponential
     term on the spectral side and so we can never expect to prove that the right hand
     side is small enough.
  2. A more serious problem is that the right hand side contains the integral term that
     has the genus in front of it. In particular, if we want this to be less than e(α+ε)·R ,
     R needs to be at least Aα,ε · log(g), where Aα,ε → ∞ as α → 0. This means
     that we need to understand geodesics of (logarithmically) growing length on Xg .
     The reason that this is difficult is that geodesics of bounded length on random
     hyperbolic surfaces of large tend to be simple, however at logarithmic scales, they
     start having self-intersections and Mirzakhani’s integration formula (Theorem 5.1)
     does not hold for mapping class group orbits of such curves.
  3. Another major (related) problem that is not yet evident from what we have derived
     so far is the hyperbolic analogue of the problem of tangles that appeared in
     Friedman’s proof. Our random surface Xg can have a problematic subsurface with
     a probability that tends to 0 as g → ∞. Just like in Friedman’s proof however,
     these probabilities do not tend to 0 fast enough and will ruin the expectations
     we’re computing.

  In what follows we will sketch how Anantharaman and Monk resolve these issues,
thus proving a near optimal spectral gap.


7.2. Removing exponential terms
   First we discuss how to deal with the first problem. The first solution can be found
in the articles Wu and Xue (2022) and Lipnowski and Wright (2024) who also used the
trace method. They observed that the term corresponding to λ0 (Xg ) = 0 on the spectral
side cancels against the contribution from simple curves on the expected geometric side
                                                                            3
and showed the remainder is small enough to prove a spectral gap of 16        − ε. The
hard part of these papers is controlling the contribution from non-simple geodesics. We
will not explain how this works, but will just very briefly describe how to compute
the contribution coming from simple closed geodesics. We will use Anantharaman and
Monk’s notation:
                                                                    !
                            ⟨F ⟩sg = E
                                               X
                                                             F (ℓ(γ)) .
                                         γ a simple closed
                                               on Xg

The simple closed curves on an orientable closed surface of genus g fall in to ⌊ g2 ⌋ + 1
mapping class group orbits. As such, it follows from Mirzakhani’s integration formula
                                                  1255–44


(Theorem 5.1) that
                                                 1 Z∞
(7)                                 ⟨F ⟩sg =          F (ℓ)Vgs (ℓ)dℓ,
                                                 Vg 0
where Vgs (ℓ) is a function that can be expressed in terms of volumes of moduli spaces
of hyperbolic surfaces with boundary. Moreover, Mirzakhani proved that
                                Vgs  4     2 ℓ
                                                 
                                                     (1 + ℓ)c eℓ
                                                                 
(8)                                 = sinh      +O                ,
                                Vg   ℓ       2           g
for some constant c > 0 (this estimate has been improved by multiple authors, notably
by Anantharaman and Monk, 2022). Putting all of the above together    D and canceling
                                                                                   Es
                                                                         ℓ·hR (ℓ)
out the contribution from the trivial eigenvalue with the main term in 2 sinh(ℓ/2)    that
                                                                                    g
cancel exactly, yields
                        s
                                        1                 Rc eR/2
                                                                    
              E    hc
                    R        λ1 (Xg ) −          =O R ·g+ 2
                                                                  + E ns (R, g),
                                        4                    g
where E ns (R, g) is the contribution coming from non-simple geodesics. Bounding the
latter and comparing this to the exponential growth coming from the trivial eigenvalue,
using (6), one finds that it’s best to set R = 4 log(g) and this yields the lower bound
           3
λ1 (Xg ) ≥ 16 − ε.
   In order to systematize these cancellations, Anantharaman and Monk replace the
Fourier transform pair (hR , hcR ) by
                                 1    d2 m            1        m
                                                                     
                        m
                  D hR (x) =       − 2 hR (x),           + ξ2     · hcR (ξ)
                                 4 dx                 4
for some m ≥q1. On the spectral side, this has the effect of removing the contribution
coming from λ0 (Xg ) − 14 = 2i . It does mean that we can no longer exclude eigenvalues
very close to 0, but these are already covered by Mirzakhani’s result (see Section 5.2).
Filling the new function in (7), again applying (8) and integrating by parts yields that
now
                                                       c R/2 
                          ℓ · DhR (ℓ) s                  Re
                                    
                                        = −hR (0) + O              .
                          2 sinh(ℓ/2) g                     g
So the exponential term in R, that canceled against the contribution from the trivial
eigenvalue before, now gets replaced by the boundedterm     hR (0). This relies crucially
                                                        ℓ
on the fact that D annihilates the function ℓ 7→ sinh 2 .
   The idea is now that if we can produce this same phenomenon for other curve types,
we could produce further cancellations and obtain finer information on λ1 (Xg ).

7.3. Friedman–Ramanujan functions
  This leads Anantharaman and Monk to the definition of what they call Friedman–
Ramanujan functions. These functions are a hyperbolic analogue to the functions that
Friedman calls Ramanujan functions (see Section 4.3.1). Before we get there, we need
to talk about curves.
                                             1255–45




       Figure 11. Three curves with three self-intersections each, on a surface of
       genus three. The leftmost two have the same local topological type, even if
       they sit in the surface differently. The rightmost curve fills a one-holed torus
       instead of a pair of pants and thus has a different local topological type.


   To group geodesics together, Anantharaman and Monk define the local topological
type of a geodesic. This is the data of the subsurface the geodesic fills (so a regular
neighborhood of the geodesic, completed by adding in any topological disks that this
regular neighborhood bounds) and the embedding of the geodesic into the surface, all
considered up to homomorphism (see Figure 11). In particular, this data does not take
into account how the subsurface that the curve fills sits in the larger surface.
   For any local topological type T, we can now define
                                                                          !
                              ⟨F ⟩T
                                                 X
                                  g = E                         F (ℓ(γ)) .
                                          γ a closed geodesic
                                           of type T on Xg

We will also write χ(T) for the Euler characteristic of the subsurface corresponding
to T.
  In order to apply a similar strategy, we first need an analogue of (7) that was
based on the Mirzakhani integration formula and provided us with a density for ⟨F ⟩sg .
Anantharaman and Monk (2023, Theorem 5.15) prove that for any topological type T
there exists a unique sequence of continuous functions (fkT )k≥|χ(T)| such that
                         K                                               F (ℓ)e(1+η)ℓ
                                1 Z∞
                                                                                             
             ⟨F ⟩T                    F (ℓ) · fkT (ℓ) dℓ + OT,K,η                        ∞
                         X
(9)              g =              k 0
                       k=|χ(T)|
                                g                                               g K+1
for any η > 0, any K ≥ 0 and any g large enough.
   In order to apply an analogous strategy to that of integration by parts and the fact that
D annihilates the function in Mirzakhani’s sinh estimate (8), we need to know that Dm
“almost” annihilates the coefficient functions fkT . This is what Friedman–Ramanujan
functions are for.

Definition 7.2. — Let c ≥ 0. We define
                                                                  Z n                              
  Rcw = f ∈ C 0 (R≥0 , C); ∃c1 > 0 such that ∀n ≥ 1 :                    |f (s)|ds ≤ c1 (n + 1)c en/2 .
                                                                    0

We also set Rw =       ∪c≥0 Rcw .                          0
                            A function f ∈ C (R≥0 , C) is said to be Friedman–
Ramanujan if there exists a polynomial p such that
                                     f (ℓ) − p(ℓ) · eℓ ∈ Rw .
                                                 1255–46


The function ℓ 7→ p(ℓ) · eℓ is called the principal term of f and f (ℓ) − p(ℓ) · eℓ is called
the remainder term of f .
  The main technical result of the final article of Anantharaman and Monk (2025,
Theorem 1.15) is:
Theorem 7.3 (Anantharaman–Monk). — The functions
                                         (
                                              ℓ · fkT (ℓ) if T = s
                                  ℓ 7→
                                              fkT (ℓ)     otherwise,
in (9) are Friedman–Ramanujan.
  The proof of this theorem forms a large portion of the total and develops many new
ideas, like for instance new coordinates adapted to the local topological type T, that
replace the Fenchel–Nielsen coordinates. We will not go into this here and refer to the
paper by Anantharaman and Monk for details.
  Using the fact that Dm annihilates functions of the form ℓ 7→ p(ℓ) · eℓ/2 with p a
polynomial of degree ≤ m − 1 allows for an argument using integration by parts again
and yields that
                                                                                  1
                                                           e( 2 +η)·R
                   D                     ET                                          
                       −ℓ/2   m                                    c(K,T)
                    ℓe    D fR (ℓ) = Om,T,K,η R         + K+1 .
                                   g                         g
So the contribution of T is only polynomial as a function of R, instead of exponential.
Balancing the error term above with the topological term in the trace formula, that is
linear in g, leads one to choose R = 2(K + 2) log(g). This yields
                              D                      ET                      
                                  ℓe−ℓ/2 Dm fR (ℓ)        = o e(α+ε)R
                                                      g
             1
with α = 2(K+2)  , which is still the same α that appears in the lower bound on the
spectral gap. In other words, the larger we can make K, the better the bound on the
spectral gap we get.

7.4. Möbius inversion and the problem of tangles
  There is one major problem left: we still need to sum over all possible local topological
types of geodesics of length at most R = 2(K + 2) log(g). This is a serious problem,
because, as Anantharaman and Monk (2023, Theorem 9.1) prove, already the function
                                  ℓ 7→ ℓ · f1all (ℓ) = ℓ ·         f1T (ℓ),
                                                             X

                                                               T

where the sum runs over all (countably many) local topological types T, is not a
Friedman–Ramanujan function. In short, the problem is that the number of local
topological types that we need to sum over grows exponentially as a function of our
parameter R. So, a priori, the strategy completely falls apart.
   As we have already mentioned, the problem is the presence of tangles. Here, for
κ, ω > 0 with κ < ω, a (κ, ω)-tangle is one of the following:
   – A Riemannian circle γ of length ℓ(γ) ≤ κ, or
                                             1255–47


   – A pair of pants or a one-holed torus whose longest boundary component has length
     at most ω.
A (κ, ω)-tangle in a hyperbolic surface X is a totally geodesically embedded (κ, ω)-tangle
in X, so either a compact subsurface of Euler characteristic −1 with totally geodesic
boundary or a simple closed geodesic. A surface that has no (κ, ω)-tangles in it is called
(κ, ω)-tangle free.
   Anantharaman and Monk (2024a, Theorem 4.6, Corollary 4.7 and Corollary 4.8)
prove a vast generalization of the collar lemma for tangle-free surfaces: for 0 < κ < 1,
ω = κ log(g), A ≥ 1, R = A · log(g) and χmin ≤ −1, there exists a constant βκ,A,χmin > 0
such that a (κ, ω)-tangle free surface X ∈ Mg supports at most
                                                              
                               Oκ,A,χmin (log(g))βκ,A,χmin
local topological types T of closed geodesics γ with χ(T) ≥ χmin and ℓ(γ) ≤ R. In
other words, under the tangle free hypothesis, we go from exponentially many local
topological types we need to deal with to only polynomially many.
  So, if we were able to condition on the set of tangle-free surfaces, we would win. The
solution is to use Möbius inversion (a version of the inclusion-exclusion principle). The
basic idea is that, if N : Ω → N is a counting variable on some probability space Ω, then
the indicator function 1{N =0} of the event that N = 0 can be written as
                                  ∞
                                  X (−1)k
                  1{N =0} = 1 −                  · N (N − 1) · · · (N − k + 1).
                                  k=1   k!
Moreover, the variable N (N − 1) · · · (N − k + 1) : Ω → N is a counting variable too, it
counts the number of ordered k-tuples of whatever N counts.
   So, we would want to set N = T κ,ω : Mg → N in the above, where T κ,ω (X) counts
the number of (κ, ω)-tangles in X. This means that 1{T κ,ω =0} is exactly the indicator
of the event that X is (κ, ω)-tangle free. However, tangles can intersect in all sorts of
complicated ways, which makes controlling the expectation of the right hand side of the
inclusion-exclusion formula difficult. So, to solve this issue, Anantharaman and Monk
(2024a, Theorem 3.1) write down a different, less explicit, Möbius function. We refer to
their article for details.
   In short, putting all of the above together produces the necessary cancellations to
make the trace method work and this proves Theorem 7.1.


8. Polynomial error bounds (Hide–Macera–Thomas)

  The final result we will discuss is the recent theorem by Hide, Macera, and Thomas
(2025b). They prove, for a Weil–Petersson distributed random surface Xg :
Theorem 8.1. — There exists a constant c > 0 such that
                                         1    1
                                               
                        lim P λ1 (Xg ) > − c = 1.
                       g→∞               4 g
                                          1255–48


   This theorem in particular recovers Theorem 7.1 by Anantharaman–Monk. The proof
starts off in the same way, namely by writing down an asymptotic expansion in powers
of g −1 for the expected trace of a function of the Laplacian. However, the way this
expression is analyzed is fundamentally different. The method is heavily inspired by
the extension of the polynomial method by Magee, Puder, and van Handel (2025). This
does not recover the many intermediate results of Anantharaman and Monk that are of
independent interest, but it does make for a (still long, but) shorter proof and improves
the estimate on λ1 (Xg ).


8.1. The interest in polynomial error bounds
  Let us first explain why one might care about polynomial error terms. The ultimate
goal is to understand the distribution of λ1 (Xg ) − 41 to a sufficient degree of precision
so as to obtain the result that for all g large enough,
                                                 1
                                                   
                                    P λ1 (Xg ) >   > 0,
                                                 4
thus proving the existence of surfaces of arbitrarily large genus with a spectral gap
that is larger than that of the hyperbolic plane. As we’ve mentioned above, Huang,
McKenzie, and Yau (2024) have successfully carried out the graph theoretic analogue
of this strategy.
  Of course, by Theorem 7.1 and (2), λ1 (Xg ) − 14 → 0 in probability. So the real
question is how fast it tends to 0 as a function of g. Once we know this, we can rescale
the random variable and hope to understand the distribution. Looking at Section 3, we
expect Xg to have roughly
                                   √    ε→0 2π
                          Z ε                                          
              (g − 1) ·      tanh(π y)dy =     · (g − 1) · ε3/2 + O ε5/2
                           0                 3
eigenvalues in the interval [ 14 , 14 + ε]. So, reverse engineering this, we get that if we
want an interval with only a constant number of eigenvalues in it, we need to take
ε = ε(g) = (g − 1)−2/3 . So we would hope that, as g → ∞, (g − 1)2/3 · λ1 (Xg ) − 14
converges to a random variable we can understand. This is exactly what happens in
the graph-theoretic setting: at exactly the scale n2/3 (where n is the number of vertices)
the distribution converges to a Tracy–Widom distribution. In short, one hopes that
Theorem 8.1 holds for c = 23 − ε for all ε > 0.


8.2. An asymptotic expansion
   Now we start explaining the strategy of proof. Again, we once and for all fix an even,
non-negative function h ∈ Cc∞ (R). The main technical result in the paper by Hide,
Macera, and Thomas (2025b, Theorem 1.4), in which h∗m means the m-fold convolution
of the function h, is:
                                              1255–49


Theorem 8.2 (Hide–Macera–Thomas). — There
                                       exists
                                              a constant c > 0 such that for
                                                              (m)
all m ∈ N there exists a sequence of constants ak                         such that
                                                                    k≥0
                             s                               q−1    (m)
                                                                              (cq)cq
                                                    m 
                     1                   1                        ak
                                                              X
                   E   · Tr h
                            b      ∆Xg −                     −       k
                                                                            ≤
                     g                   4                     k=0 g            gq
for all q > m and g > cq c . Moreover
                             Z ∞ 
                                  s    m      s
                                     1               1
                                                       
                       (m)
                      a0 =      h y−
                                b         tanh π y −     dy
                              1
                              4
                                                4                           4
and                                                  2
                                 ∞                      ℓ
                       (m)
                              Z ∞X           sinh       2
                      a1 =               2                 h∗m (kℓ) dℓ − a(m)
                                                                            0 .
                                                        kℓ
                               0   k=1       sinh        2

   At first sight, this theorem looks very much like some of the things we have already
seen. Indeed, Anantharaman and Monk (2023) had already observed, using the volume
estimates due to Mirzakhani and Zograf (2015) and Anantharaman and Monk (2022),
that an asymptotic expansion for expectations like the one above exists (see e.g. (9)
                                                                                       (m)
above). Moreover, as Hide, Macera and Thomas note, the fact that the coefficients a0
      (m)
and a1 take the stated shape can be derived using computations very similar to those
performed by Mirzakhani and the author (2019).
   The main point of the theorem above is the innocent looking error estimate. The
largest part of the work in the paper goes into proving this estimate, namely, that the
constant in the “O(g −q )” estimate grows at most factorially fast as a function of q. To
prove this, Hide, Macera and Thomas analyze the known recurrences for Weil–Petersson
volumes and intersection numbers of tautological classes on moduli spaces and need to
make many estimates effective. This is difficult and we will not describe this in detail
here. We refer to their paper for details.
   The upshot of all of this is that, once the theorem above has been established, unlike
in the previous section, we don’t need to know anything further about the remaining
coefficients except their existence. We also no longer need to analyze geodesics whose
lengths grow as a function of the genus. Instead, one can adapt the strategy that Magee,
Puder, and van Handel (2025) used in the proof of a near optimal spectral gap for
random finite degree covers of a closed surface, based on the analogue of the theorem
above in that context (Theorem 1.7 in the paper by Magee, Puder and van Handel).

8.3. Deducing a spectral gap
 Just like
           in the previous section, we will only exclude eigenvalues in an interval
 δ, 14 − g −c for a fixed c > 0 and some small δ > 0 and rely on for instance Mirzakhani’s
result (see Section 5.2) to exclude eigenvalues close to 0. The number δ will be a constant
in what follows, so given Mirzakhani’s bound, we can for instance choose δ = 0.002.
This assumption of an a priori spectral gap is not strictly necessary, because a similar
cancellation to the one observed by Wu–Xue and Lipnowski–Wright (see Section 7.2
                                                                  1255–50


above) can also be used to deal with the spectrum close to 0. We will not provide
further details here.
  Theqfirst goal of the remainder of the proof is to extend Theorem 8.2 from polynomials
in h ∆Xg − 14 to smooth functions of the same quantity. There is an immediate
   b
                                                                                                        q             
problem, namely that for an arbitrary smooth function f , the operator f h
                                                                         b ∆Xg − 14
is not trace class. To solve this, Hide, Macera and Thomas consider only functions of
the form
                                                       x 7→ f (x) = x · fe(x),
where fe ∈ C ∞ (R) is any function.
                                                             (m)           (m)
  First of all, we turn the coefficients a0 and a1 into linear functionals on polynomials.
Because of the extra multiplication by x, we will input a polynomial p(x) ∈ C[x], but
compute the coefficients for x · p(x). That is, we set
                     q−1                                           s               s
                                              q−1             Z ∞         m+1
                                                                         1               1
                                                                                          
                              s m xm =
                      X                       X
               ν0                                      sm   ·    h
                                                                 b    y−        tanh y −     dy
                     m=0                      m=0
                                                              1
                                                              4
                                                                                 4                    4
and
                                                                          2
            q−1                      q−1             ∞             ℓ                        q−1
                                                  Z ∞X           sinh
                                                                    2
                                                                                                          
                          m                                          h∗(m+1) (kℓ) dℓ − ν0             m
             X                        X                                                       X
      ν1           sm x           =         sm ·              2     kℓ
                                                                                                  s m x    .
            m=0                       m=0              0   k=1 sinh 2                        m=0

Hide, Macera, and Thomas (2025b, Proposition 3.2) then use Theorem 8.2 to prove,
following a similar strategy to the papers by Chen, Garza-Vargas, Tropp, and van Handel
(2026) and Magee, Puder, and van Handel (2025), based on a variant of the Markov
brothers’ inequality, that these functionals extend to compactly supported distributions.
That is, we can evaluate them on smooth functions fe ∈ C ∞ (R) and we moreover have
                       s
       1                                           1                        ν1 (fe)
                                                      
(10) E   · Tr f h
                b                     ∆Xg −                   − ν0 (fe) −
       g                                           4                           g
                                                                             C                                         
                                                                           ≤ 2 · ∥w(m) ∥[0,2π] + ∥fe∥[−bh( i ),bh( i )]
                                                                            g                              2       2


for some uniform C, m > 0 for all fe ∈ C ∞ (R) and all g ≥ 2. We have          again set
                                                                                          
                                        ∞
f (x) = x · f (x) and the function w ∈ C ([0, 2π]) is defined by w(θ) = f h 2i · cos(θ)
                                                                           e b

and w(m) is its mth derivative with respect to θ. Finally, ∥ · ∥[a,b] denotes the sup-norm
restricted to [a, b].
   Next, Hide, Macera, and Thomas (2025b, Lemma 3.3) investigate the support of ν0
and ν1 . This is where the lower bound δ > 0 comes into play. Using the fact that ν0
and ν1 have a very explicit form when evaluated on polynomial, one proves that, if
f ∈ C ∞ (R) has support
                                                                                 s
                                                                                     1
                                                                                          
                                            supp(f ) ⊂           h(0),
                                                                 b     h
                                                                       b   i·          −δ
                                                                                     4
                                         1255–51


then for fe(x) = f (x)/x we have
                                   ν0 (fe) = ν1 (fe) = 0.
  Using a lemma from Chen, Garza-Vargas, Tropp, and van Handel (2026, Lemma 4.10),
Hide Macera and Thomas prove that, for any η > 0 small enough, one can find a non-
negative function f ∈ C ∞ (R) such that
                                                 s
                                        
                                             √          1
                                                              
                f (x) = 1   for all x ∈ h i · ε , h i ·
                                        b         b       −δ−η ,
                                                              4
                                                  s
                                                      1          b i
                                                                 
           f (x) = 0   for all x ∈ (−∞, h(0)] ∪ h i ·
                                        b        b      − δ + η ,h
                                                              4                    2
and moreover
                               ∥w(m) ∥[0,2π] ≤ c(m) · ε−m/2
for all ε > 0 small enough.
   This means that we obtain
                                                    s
                             1                                      1
                                                                             
         P δ + η ≤ λ1 (Xg ) ≤ − ε ≤ P Tr f h
                                           b                ∆Xg −             ≥1
                             4                                      4
                                                              s
                                      Markov           1                       1
                                                                                  
                                         ≤       g · E Tr f h
                                                            b        ∆Xg −                .
                                                       g                       4
Now we use (10) and obtain that
                                          1         ε−m/2
                       P δ + η ≤ λ1 (Xg ) ≤ − ε ≤ C ·       ,
                                           4            g
                                                   
which tends to 0 as long as ε = ε(g) = o g 2/m as g → ∞ and this proves the main
result of this section.


References

Miklos Abert, Nicolas Bergeron, Ian Biringer, Tsachik Gelander, Nikolay Nikolov, Jean
  Raimbault, and Iddo Samet (2017). “On the growth of L2 -invariants for sequences of
  lattices in Lie groups”, Ann. of Math. (2) 185 (3), pp. 711–790.
Noga Alon (1986). “Eigenvalues and expanders”, in: vol. 6. 2. Theory of computing
 (Singer Island, Fla., 1984), pp. 83–96.
Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk (2022). “A high-genus asymptotic expansion of
 Weil–Petersson volume polynomials”, J. Math. Phys. 63 (4), Paper No. 043502, 26.
        (2023). “Friedman–Ramanujan functions in random hyperbolic geometry and
  application to spectral gaps I”. arXiv: 2304.02678 [math.SP].
        (2024a). “A Moebius inversion formula to discard tangled hyperbolic surfaces”.
  arXiv: 2401.01601 [math.GT].
        (2024b). “Spectral gap of random hyperbolic surfaces”. arXiv: 2403 . 12576
  [math.GT].
                                       1255–52


Nalini Anantharaman and Laura Monk (2025). “Friedman–Ramanujan functions in
   random hyperbolic geometry and application to spectral gaps II”. arXiv: 2502.12268
   [math.MG].
         (2026). “Typical hyperbolic surfaces have a spectral gap greater than 2/9 − ϵ”.
   arXiv: 2604.09792 [math.SP].
Michele Ancona, François Labourie, Ana Roig Sanchis, and Jérémy Toulisse (2025).
  “Minimal surfaces with negative curvature in large dimensional spheres”. arXiv: 2510.
   18618 [math.DG].
Omer Angel and Oded Schramm (2003). “Uniform infinite planar triangulations”, Comm.
  Math. Phys. 241 (2-3), pp. 191–213.
Francisco Arana-Herrera (2021). “Equidistribution of families of expanding horospheres
   on moduli spaces of hyperbolic surfaces”, Geom. Dedicata 210, pp. 65–102.
Francisco Arana-Herrera and Jayadev S. Athreya (2020). “Square-integrability of the
   Mirzakhani function and statistics of simple closed geodesics on hyperbolic surfaces”,
  Forum Math. Sigma 8, Paper No. e9, 33.
Richard Arratia, Andrew D. Barbour, and Simon Tavaré (2003). Logarithmic combinato-
  rial structures: a probabilistic approach. EMS Monographs in Mathematics. European
   Mathematical Society (EMS), Zürich, pp. xii+363.
Werner Ballmann, Sugata Mondal, and Panagiotis Polymerakis (2025). “On the spectral
   stability of finite coverings”. arXiv: 2507.17466 [math.DG].
Simon Barazer, Alessandro Giacchetto, and Mingkun Liu (2025). “Length spectrum of
   large genus random metric maps”, Forum Math. Sigma 13, Paper No. e70, 28.
Christophe Bavard (1996). “Disques extrémaux et surfaces modulaires”, Ann. Fac. Sci.
  Toulouse Math. (6) 5 (2), pp. 191–202.
Mikhail Belolipetsky, Tsachik Gelander, Alexander Lubotzky, and Aner Shalev (2010).
  “Counting arithmetic lattices and surfaces”, Ann. of Math. (2) 172 (3), pp. 2197–2221.
Gennadi V. Belyı̆ (1979). “Galois extensions of a maximal cyclotomic field”, Izv. Akad.
  Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 43 (2), pp. 267–276, 479.
Itai Benjamini and Oded Schramm (2001). “Recurrence of distributional limits of finite
   planar graphs”, Electron. J. Probab. 6, no. 23, 13.
Nicolas Bergeron (2016). The spectrum of hyperbolic surfaces. Universitext. Appendix
   C by Valentin Blomer and Farrell Brumley, Translated from the 2011 French original
   by Brumley. Springer, Cham; EDP Sciences, Les Ulis, pp. xiii+370.
Lipman Bers (1974). “Spaces of degenerating Riemann surfaces”, in: Discontinuous
  groups and Riemann surfaces (Proc. Conf., Univ. Maryland, College Park, Md., 1973).
  Vol. No. 79. Ann. of Math. Stud. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, pp. 43–55.
Yonatan Bilu and Nathan Linial (2006). “Lifts, discrepancy and nearly optimal spectral
   gap”, Combinatorica 26 (5), pp. 495–519.
Béla Bollobás (1981). “Random graphs”, in: Combinatorics (Swansea, 1981). Vol. 52.
   London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge-New York,
   pp. 80–102.
                                       1255–53


James Bonifacio (2022). “Bootstrapping closed hyperbolic surfaces”, J. High Energy
  Phys. (3), Paper No. 093, 18.
Andrew R. Booker, Min Lee, and Andreas Strömbergsson (2020). “Twist-minimal trace
  formulas and the Selberg eigenvalue conjecture”, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 102 (3),
  pp. 1067–1134.
Andrew R. Booker and Andreas Strömbergsson (2007). “Numerical computations with
  the trace formula and the Selberg eigenvalue conjecture”, J. Reine Angew. Math. 607,
  pp. 113–161.
Charles Bordenave (2020). “A new proof of Friedman’s second eigenvalue theorem and
  its extension to random lifts”, Ann. Sci. Éc. Norm. Supér. (4) 53 (6), pp. 1393–1439.
Charles Bordenave and Benoît Collins (2019). “Eigenvalues of random lifts and polyno-
  mials of random permutation matrices”, Ann. of Math. (2) 190 (3), pp. 811–875.
David Borthwick (2016). Spectral theory of infinite-area hyperbolic surfaces. Second.
  Vol. 318. Progress in Mathematics. Birkhäuser/Springer, [Cham], pp. xiii+463.
        (2020). Spectral theory—basic concepts and applications. Vol. 284. Graduate
  Texts in Mathematics. Springer, Cham, pp. x+338.
Lewis Bowen, Kasra Rafi, and Hunter Vallejos (2025). “Benjamini–Schramm limits
  of high genus translation surfaces: research announcement”. arXiv: 2501 . 03474
  [math.GT].
Emmanuel Breuillard (2014). “Expander graphs, property (τ ) and approximate groups”,
  in: Geometric group theory. Vol. 21. IAS/Park City Math. Ser. Amer. Math. Soc.,
  Providence, RI, pp. 325–377.
Andrei Broder and Eli Shamir (1987). “On the second eigenvalue of random regular
  graphs”. In: Proceedings of the 28th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
  Science. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 286–294.
Robert Brooks (1985). “The bottom of the spectrum of a Riemannian covering”, J.
  Reine Angew. Math. 357, pp. 101–114.
        (1986). “Combinatorial problems in spectral geometry”, in: Curvature and topol-
  ogy of Riemannian manifolds (Katata, 1985). Vol. 1201. Lecture Notes in Math.
  Springer, Berlin, pp. 14–32.
        (1999). “Platonic surfaces”, Comment. Math. Helv. 74 (1), pp. 156–170.
Robert Brooks and Eran Makover (2001a). “Belyı̆ surfaces”, in: Entire functions in
  modern analysis (Tel-Aviv, 1997). Vol. 15. Israel Math. Conf. Proc. Bar-Ilan Univ.,
  Ramat Gan, pp. 37–46.
        (2001b). “Riemann surfaces with large first eigenvalue”, J. Anal. Math. 83,
  pp. 243–258.
        (2004). “Random construction of Riemann surfaces”, J. Differential Geom. 68
  (1), pp. 121–157.
Robert Brooks and Andrzej Zuk (2002). “On the asymptotic isoperimetric constants for
  Riemann surfaces and graphs”, J. Differential Geom. 62 (1), pp. 49–78.
                                        1255–54


Timothy Budd and Nicolas Curien (2025). “Random punctured hyperbolic surfaces &
   the Brownian sphere”. arXiv: 2508.18792 [math.PR].
Timothy Budd and Tanguy Lions (2025). “The tight length spectrum of large-genus
   random hyperbolic surfaces with many cusps”. arXiv: 2506.02611 [math.PR].
Timothy Budd and Bart Zonneveld (2024). “Topological recursion of the Weil–Petersson
  volumes of hyperbolic surfaces with tight boundaries”, J. Math. Phys. 65 (9), Paper
   No. 092302, 34.
Thomas Budzinski, Nicolas Curien, and Bram Petri (2021a). “On the minimal diameter
   of closed hyperbolic surfaces”, Duke Math. J. 170 (2), pp. 365–377.
         (2021b). “The diameter of random Belyı̆ surfaces”, Algebr. Geom. Topol. 21 (6),
   pp. 2929–2957.
         (2025). “On Cheeger constants of hyperbolic surfaces”, Invent. Math. 242 (2),
   pp. 511–530.
Marc Burger (1986). “Grandes valeurs propres du laplacien et graphes”, in: Séminaire
  de Théorie Spectrale et Géométrie, No. 4, Année 1985–1986. Univ. Grenoble I, Saint-
   Martin-d’Hères, pp. 95–100.
Peter Buser (1977). “Riemannsche Flächen mit Eigenwerten in (0, 1/4)”, Comment.
  Math. Helv. 52 (1), pp. 25–34.
         (1978). “Cubic graphs and the first eigenvalue of a Riemann surface”, Math. Z.
  162 (1), pp. 87–99.
         (1982). “A note on the isoperimetric constant”, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4)
  15 (2), pp. 213–230.
         (1984). “On the bipartition of graphs”, Discrete Appl. Math. 9 (1), pp. 105–109.
         (2010). Geometry and spectra of compact Riemann surfaces. Modern Birkhäuser
   Classics. Reprint of the 1992 edition. Birkhäuser Boston, Ltd., Boston, MA,
   pp. xvi+454.
Peter Buser, Marc Burger, and Jozef Dodziuk (1988). “Riemann surfaces of large
   genus and large λ1 ”, in: Geometry and analysis on manifolds (Katata/Kyoto, 1987).
  Vol. 1339. Lecture Notes in Math. Springer, Berlin, pp. 54–63.
Peter Buser and Peter Sarnak (1994). “On the period matrix of a Riemann surface of
   large genus”, Invent. Math. 117 (1). With an appendix by John H. Conway and Neil
  J. A. Sloane, pp. 27–56.
Irvong Calderón, Michael Magee, and Frédéric Naud (2024). “Spectral gap for random
   Schottky surfaces”. arXiv: 2407.21506 [math.SP].
Isaac Chavel (1984). Eigenvalues in Riemannian geometry. Vol. 115. Pure and Applied
   Mathematics. Including a chapter by Burton Randol, With an appendix by Jozef
   Dodziuk. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, FL, pp. xiv+362.
Jeff Cheeger (1970). “A lower bound for the smallest eigenvalue of the Laplacian”, in:
  Problems in analysis (Papers dedicated to Salomon Bochner, 1969). Princeton Univ.
   Press, Princeton, N. J., pp. 195–199.
                                       1255–55


Chi-Fang Chen, Jorge Garza-Vargas, Joel A. Tropp, and Ramon van Handel (2026). “A
   new approach to strong convergence”, Ann. of Math. (2) 203 (2), pp. 555–602.
Chi-Fang Chen, Jorge Garza-Vargas, and Ramon van Handel (2024). “A new approach
   to strong convergence II. The classical ensembles”. arXiv: 2412.00593 [math.PR].
Shiu-Yuen Cheng (1975). “Eigenvalue comparison theorems and its geometric applica-
   tions”, Math. Z. 143 (3), pp. 289–297.
Persi Diaconis and Mehrdad Shahshahani (1981). “Generating a random permutation
   with random transpositions”, Z. Wahrsch. Verw. Gebiete 57 (2), pp. 159–179.
John D. Dixon (1969). “The probability of generating the symmetric group”, Math. Z.
   110, pp. 199–205.
Benson Farb and Dan Margalit (2012). A primer on mapping class groups. Vol. 49.
   Princeton Mathematical Series. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
   pp. xiv+472.
Maxime Fortier Bourque and Bram Petri (2023). “Linear programming bounds for
   hyperbolic surfaces”. arXiv: 2302.02540 [math.GT].
Joel Friedman (1993). “Some geometric aspects of graphs and their eigenfunctions”,
   Duke Math. J. 69 (3), pp. 487–525.
         (2008). “A proof of Alon’s second eigenvalue conjecture and related problems”,
   Mem. Amer. Math. Soc. 195 (910), pp. viii+100.
Michael E. Gage (1980). “Upper bounds for the first eigenvalue of the Laplace-Beltrami
   operator”, Indiana Univ. Math. J. 29 (6), pp. 897–912.
Alex Gamburd (2006). “Poisson-Dirichlet distribution for random Belyi surfaces”, Ann.
   Probab. 34 (5), pp. 1827–1848.
Giacomo Gavelli and Claudius Kamp (2024). “Benjamini–Schramm vs Plancherel con-
   vergence”. arXiv: 2407.18822 [math.GR].
Israel M. Gel’fand, Mark I. Graev, and Ilya I. Pyatetskii-Shapiro (1990). Representation
   theory and automorphic functions. Vol. 6. Generalized Functions. Translated from the
   Russian by K. A. Hirsch, Reprint of the 1969 edition. Academic Press, Inc., Boston,
   MA, pp. xviii+426.
Clifford Gilmore, Étienne Le Masson, Tuomas Sahlsten, and Joe Thomas (2021). “Short
   geodesic loops and Lp norms of eigenfunctions on large genus random surfaces”, Geom.
   Funct. Anal. 31 (1), pp. 62–110.
William M. Goldman (1984). “The symplectic nature of fundamental groups of surfaces”,
   Adv. in Math. 54 (2), pp. 200–225.
Yulin Gong (2024). “Spectral distribution of twisted Laplacian on typical hyperbolic
   surfaces of high genus”, Comm. Math. Phys. 405 (7), Paper No. 158, 41.
Larry Guth, Hugo Parlier, and Robert Young (2011). “Pants decompositions of random
   surfaces”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 21 (5), pp. 1069–1090.
Yuxin He, Yang Shen, Yunhui Wu, and Yuhao Xue (2023). “Non-simple systoles on
   random hyperbolic surfaces for large genus”. arXiv: 2308.16447 [math.GT].
                                       1255–56


Yuxin He and Yunhui Wu (2025). “Averages of determinants of Laplacians over moduli
  spaces for large genus”, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 112 (6), Paper No. e70395, 21.
Yuxin He, Yunhui Wu, and Yuhao Xue (2026). “Uniform spectral gaps for random
  hyperbolic surfaces with not many cusps”. arXiv: 2602.08352 [math.DG].
Dennis A. Hejhal (1976). The Selberg trace formula for PSL(2, R). Vol. I. Vol. Vol. 548.
  Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin-New York, pp. vi+516.
        (1983). The Selberg trace formula for PSL(2, R). Vol. 2. Vol. 1001. Lecture
  Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. viii+806.
Will Hide (2023a). “Effective lower bounds for spectra of random covers and random
  unitary bundles”. arXiv: 2305.04584 [math.SP].
        (2023b). “Spectral gap for Weil–Petersson random surfaces with cusps”, Int.
  Math. Res. Not. (20), pp. 17411–17460.
Will Hide, Davide Macera, and Joe Thomas (2025a). “Spectral gap with polynomial
  rate for random covering surfaces”. arXiv: 2505.08479 [math.SP].
        (2025b). “Spectral gap with polynomial rate for Weil–Petersson random sur-
  faces”. arXiv: 2508.14874 [math.SP].
Will Hide and Michael Magee (2023). “Near optimal spectral gaps for hyperbolic sur-
  faces”, Ann. of Math. (2) 198 (2), pp. 791–824.
Will Hide, Julien Moy, and Frédéric Naud (2025). “On the spectral gap of negatively
  curved surface covers”, Int. Math. Res. Not. (24), Paper No. rnaf357, 24.
Will Hide and Bram Petri (2024). “Limit points of uniform arithmetic bass notes”.
  arXiv: 2412.15111 [math.SP].
Will Hide and Joe Thomas (2025a). “Large-n asymptotics for Weil–Petersson volumes
  of moduli spaces of bordered hyperbolic surfaces”, Comm. Math. Phys. 406 (9), Paper
  No. 203, 41.
        (2025b). “Short geodesics and small eigenvalues on random hyperbolic punctured
  spheres”, Comment. Math. Helv. 100 (3), pp. 463–506.
Shlomo Hoory, Nathan Linial, and Avi Wigderson (2006). “Expander graphs and their
  applications”, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 43 (4), pp. 439–561.
Jiaoyang Huang, Theo McKenzie, and Horng-Tzer Yau (2024). “Ramanujan Property
  and Edge Universality of Random Regular Graphs”. arXiv: 2412.20263 [math.PR].
Heinz Huber (1974). “Über den ersten Eigenwert des Laplace-Operators auf kompakten
  Riemannschen Flächen”, Comment. Math. Helv. 49, pp. 251–259.
Adolf Hurwitz (1901). “Ueber die Anzahl der Riemann’schen Flächen mit gegebenen
  Verzweigungspunkten”, Math. Ann. 55 (1), pp. 53–66.
Martin N. Huxley (1985). “Introduction to Kloostermania”, in: Elementary and analytic
  theory of numbers (Warsaw, 1982). Vol. 17. Banach Center Publ. PWN, Warsaw,
  pp. 217–306.
Yoichi Imayoshi and Masahiko Taniguchi (1992). An introduction to Teichmüller spaces.
  Translated and revised from the Japanese by the authors. Springer-Verlag, Tokyo,
  pp. xiv+279.
                                       1255–57


Henryk Iwaniec (2002). Spectral methods of automorphic forms. Second. Vol. 53. Gradu-
   ate Studies in Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI; Revista
   Matemática Iberoamericana, Madrid, pp. xii+220.
Svante Janson and Baptiste Louf (2023). “Unicellular maps vs. hyperbolic surfaces in
   large genus: simple closed curves”, Ann. Probab. 51 (3), pp. 899–929.
Gareth Jones and David Singerman (1996). “Belyı̆ functions, hypermaps and Galois
   groups”, Bull. London Math. Soc. 28 (6), pp. 561–590.
Harry Kesten (1959). “Symmetric random walks on groups”, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
   92, pp. 336–354.
Elena Kim and Zhongkai Tao (2026). “Eigenvalue rigidity of hyperbolic surfaces in the
   random cover model”. arXiv: 2603.01127 [math.SP].
Henry H. Kim and Peter Sarnak (2003). “Refined estimates towards the Ramanujan
   and Selberg conjectures”, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 16 (1). appendix to the article “Func-
   toriality for the exterior square of GL4 and the symmetric fourth of GL2 ” by Kim,
   pp. 175–183.
Adam Klukowski and Vladimir Marković (2024). “Tangle free permutations and the
   Putman-Wieland property of random covers”, Int. Math. Res. Not. (20), pp. 13400–
  13416.
Emmanuel Kowalski (2019). An introduction to expander graphs. Vol. 26. Cours Spécial-
   isés. Société Mathématique de France, Paris, pp. x+276.
Petr Kravchuk, Dalimil Mazáč, and Sridip Pal (2024). “Automorphic spectra and the
   conformal bootstrap”, Commun. Am. Math. Soc. 4, pp. 1–63.
Jean-François Le Gall (2013). “Uniqueness and universality of the Brownian map”, Ann.
  Probab. 41 (4), pp. 2880–2960.
Étienne Le Masson and Tuomas Sahlsten (2017). “Quantum ergodicity and Benjamini–
   Schramm convergence of hyperbolic surfaces”, Duke Math. J. 166 (18), pp. 3425–
   3460.
Silvio Levy, ed. (1999). The eightfold way. Vol. 35. Mathematical Sciences Research
   Institute Publications. The beauty of Klein’s quartic curve. Cambridge University
   Press, Cambridge, pp. x+331.
Martin W. Liebeck and Aner Shalev (2004). “Fuchsian groups, coverings of Riemann
   surfaces, subgroup growth, random quotients and random walks”, J. Algebra 276 (2),
   pp. 552–601.
Michael Lipnowski and Alex Wright (2024). “Towards optimal spectral gaps in large
   genus”, Ann. Probab. 52 (2), pp. 545–575.
Mingkun Liu (2022). “Length statistics of random multicurves on closed hyperbolic
   surfaces”, Groups Geom. Dyn. 16 (2), pp. 437–459.
Mingkun Liu and Bram Petri (2023). “Random surfaces with large systoles”. arXiv:
   2312.11428 [math.GT].
                                       1255–58


Larsen Louder and Michael Magee (2025). “Strongly convergent unitary representations
  of limit groups”, J. Funct. Anal. 288 (6). With an appendix by Will Hide and Magee,
  Paper No. 110803, 28.
Alexander Lubotzky, Ralph Phillips, and Peter Sarnak (1988). “Ramanujan graphs”,
  Combinatorica 8 (3), pp. 261–277.
Alexander Lubotzky and Daniel Segal (2003). Subgroup growth. Vol. 212. Progress in
  Mathematics. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, pp. xxii+453.
Nathan A. M. Lulov (1996). Random walks on the symmetric group generated by con-
  jugacy classes. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Harvard University. ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI,
  p. 57.
Colin Maclachlan and Alan W. Reid (2003). The arithmetic of hyperbolic 3-manifolds.
  Vol. 219. Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York, pp. xiv+463.
Michael Magee (2020). “Letter to Bram Petri”. Available at: https://www.mmagee.
  net/diameter.pdf.
         (2024). “The limit points of the bass notes of arithmetic hyperbolic surfaces”.
  arXiv: 2403.00928 [math.NT].
          (2025). “Strong convergence of unitary and permutation representations of
  discrete groups”. arXiv: 2503.21619 [math.GR].
Michael Magee and Frédéric Naud (2020). “Explicit spectral gaps for random covers of
  Riemann surfaces”, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. 132, pp. 137–179.
Michael Magee, Frédéric Naud, and Doron Puder (2022). “A random cover of a compact
                                                   3
  hyperbolic surface has relative spectral gap 16     − ε”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 32 (3),
  pp. 595–661.
Michael Magee and Doron Puder (2022). “Core surfaces”, Geom. Dedicata 216 (4),
  Paper No. 46, 25.
         (2023). “The asymptotic statistics of random covering surfaces”, Forum Math.
  Pi 11, Paper No. e15, 51.
Michael Magee, Doron Puder, and Ramon van Handel (2025). “Strong convergence of
  uniformly random permutation representations of surface groups”. arXiv: 2504.08988
  [math.GT].
Yotam Maoz (2025). “Asymptotic independence for random permutations from surface
  groups”, Geom. Dedicata 219 (3), Paper No. 43, 31.
         (2026). “Smooth linear eigenvalue statistics on random covers of compact hy-
  perbolic surfaces—a central limit theorem and almost sure RMT statistics”, Israel
  Journal of Mathematics, pp. 1–50.
Adam W. Marcus, Daniel A. Spielman, and Nikhil Srivastava (2015). “Interlacing fami-
  lies I: Bipartite Ramanujan graphs of all degrees”, Ann. of Math. (2) 182 (1), pp. 307–
  325.
Grigory A. Margulis (1988). “Explicit group-theoretic constructions of combinatorial
  schemes and their applications in the construction of expanders and concentrators”,
  Problemy Peredachi Informatsii 24 (1), pp. 51–60.
                                        1255–59


Jens Marklof and Laura Monk (2024). “The moduli space of twisted Laplacians and
  random matrix theory”, Int. Math. Res. Not. (23), pp. 14352–14368.
Howard Masur, Kasra Rafi, and Anja Randecker (2024). “Lengths of saddle connections
  on random translation surfaces of large genus”. arXiv: 2412.08727 [math.GT].
Carlos Matheus (2013). “Some quantitative versions of Ratner’s mixing estimates”, Bull.
  Braz. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 44 (3), pp. 469–488.
Joffrey Mathien (2024). “Diameter of a new model of random hyperbolic surfaces”.
  arXiv: 2403.01925 [math.GT].
Brendan D. McKay (1981). “The expected eigenvalue distribution of a large regular
  graph”, Linear Algebra Appl. 40, pp. 203–216.
Henry P. McKean (1970). “An upper bound to the spectrum of ∆ on a manifold of
  negative curvature”, J. Differential Geometry 4, pp. 359–366.
Grégory Miermont (2013). “The Brownian map is the scaling limit of uniform random
  plane quadrangulations”, Acta Math. 210 (2), pp. 319–401.
Maryam Mirzakhani (2007a). “Simple geodesics and Weil–Petersson volumes of moduli
  spaces of bordered Riemann surfaces”, Invent. Math. 167 (1), pp. 179–222.
        (2007b). “Weil–Petersson volumes and intersection theory on the moduli space
  of curves”, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 20 (1), pp. 1–23.
        (2008). “Growth of the number of simple closed geodesics on hyperbolic surfaces”,
  Ann. of Math. (2) 168 (1), pp. 97–125.
        (2013). “Growth of Weil–Petersson volumes and random hyperbolic surfaces of
  large genus”, J. Differential Geom. 94 (2), pp. 267–300.
Maryam Mirzakhani and Bram Petri (2019). “Lengths of closed geodesics on random
  surfaces of large genus”, Comment. Math. Helv. 94 (4), pp. 869–889.
Maryam Mirzakhani and Peter Zograf (2015). “Towards large genus asymptotics of
  intersection numbers on moduli spaces of curves”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 25 (4), pp. 1258–
  1289.
Laura Monk (2022). “Benjamini–Schramm convergence and spectra of random hyper-
  bolic surfaces of high genus”, Anal. PDE 15 (3), pp. 727–752.
Laura Monk and Rareş Stan (2025). “Spectral convergence of the Dirac operator on
  typical hyperbolic surfaces of high genus”, Ann. Henri Poincaré 26 (1), pp. 365–387.
Laura Monk and Joe Thomas (2022). “The tangle-free hypothesis on random hyperbolic
  surfaces”, Int. Math. Res. Not. (22), pp. 18154–18185.
Moshe Morgenstern (1994). “Existence and explicit constructions of q + 1 regular Ra-
  manujan graphs for every prime power q”, J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 62 (1), pp. 44–
  62.
Julien Moy (2024). “Spectral statistics of the Laplacian on random covers of a closed
  negatively curved surface”. arXiv: 2408.02808 [math.SP].
        (2025). “Spectral gap of random covers of negatively curved noncompact sur-
  faces”. arXiv: 2505.07056 [math.SP].
                                       1255–60


Thomas W. Müller and Jan-Christoph Schlage-Puchta (2002). “Character theory of
  symmetric groups and subgroup growth of surface groups”, J. London Math. Soc. (2)
  66 (3), pp. 623–640.
        (2007). “Character theory of symmetric groups, subgroup growth of Fuchsian
  groups, and random walks”, Adv. Math. 213 (2), pp. 919–982.
Hossein Namazi, Pekka Pankka, and Juan Souto (2014). “Distributional limits of Rie-
  mannian manifolds and graphs with sublinear genus growth”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 24
  (1), pp. 322–359.
Frédéric Naud (2023). “Determinants of Laplacians on random hyperbolic surfaces”, J.
  Anal. Math. 151 (1), pp. 265–291.
        (2026). “Random covers of compact surfaces and smooth linear spectral statis-
  tics”, Ann. Henri Poincaré 27 (1), pp. 347–373.
Alexandru Nica (1994). “On the number of cycles of given length of a free word in
  several random permutations”, Random Structures Algorithms 5 (5), pp. 703–730.
Xin Nie, Yunhui Wu, and Yuhao Xue (2023). “Large genus asymptotics for lengths of
  separating closed geodesics on random surfaces”, J. Topol. 16 (1), pp. 106–175.
A. Nilli (1991). “On the second eigenvalue of a graph”, Discrete Math. 91 (2), pp. 207–
  210.
Jean-Pierre Otal and Eulalio Rosas (2009). “Pour toute surface hyperbolique de genre
  g, λ2g−2 > 1/4”, Duke Math. J. 150 (1), pp. 101–115.
Hugo Parlier (2024). “A shorter note on shorter pants”, Bull. Lond. Math. Soc. 56 (4),
  pp. 1483–1487.
Hugo Parlier, Yunhui Wu, and Yuhao Xue (2022). “The simple separating systole for
  hyperbolic surfaces of large genus”, J. Inst. Math. Jussieu 21 (6), pp. 2205–2214.
Bram Petri (2017). “Random regular graphs and the systole of a random surface”, J.
  Topol. 10 (1), pp. 211–267.
Bram Petri and Christoph Thäle (2018). “Poisson approximation of the length spectrum
  of random surfaces”, Indiana Univ. Math. J. 67 (3), pp. 1115–1141.
Gilles Pisier (2018). “On a linearization trick”, Enseign. Math. 64 (3-4), pp. 315–326.
Jim Pitman (2006). Combinatorial stochastic processes. Vol. 1875. Lecture Notes in
  Mathematics. Lectures from the 32nd Summer School on Probability Theory held
  in Saint-Flour, July 7–24, 2002, With a foreword by Jean Picard. Springer-Verlag,
  Berlin, pp. x+256.
Doron Puder and Tomer Zimhoni (2024). “Local statistics of random permutations from
  free products”, Int. Math. Res. Not. (5), pp. 4242–4300.
Andrew Putman and Ben Wieland (2013). “Abelian quotients of subgroups of the
  mappings class group and higher Prym representations”, J. Lond. Math. Soc. (2) 88
  (1), pp. 79–96.
Jean Raimbault (2014). “Géométrie et topologie des variétés hyperboliques de grand
  volume”, Séminaire de théorie spectrale et géométrie 31, pp. 163–195.
                                       1255–61


Marina Ratner (1987). “The rate of mixing for geodesic and horocycle flows”, Ergodic
  Theory Dynam. Systems 7 (2), pp. 267–288.
Walter Roelcke (1956). “Über die Wellengleichung bei Grenzkreisgruppen erster Art”,
  S.-B. Heidelberger Akad. Wiss. Math.-Nat. Kl. 1953/1955, pp. 159–267.
Zeév Rudnick (2023). “GOE statistics on the moduli space of surfaces of large genus”,
  Geom. Funct. Anal. 33 (6), pp. 1581–1607.
Zeév Rudnick and Igor Wigman (2023). “On the central limit theorem for linear eigen-
  value statistics on random surfaces of large genus”, J. Anal. Math. 151 (1), pp. 293–
  302.
        (2025). “Almost sure GOE fluctuations of energy levels for hyperbolic surfaces
  of high genus”, Ann. Henri Poincaré 26 (6), pp. 2279–2291.
The Sage Developers (2021). SageMath, the Sage Mathematics Software System (Version
  9.3). https://www.sagemath.org.
Peter Sarnak (2003). “Spectra of hyperbolic surfaces”, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.)
  40 (4), pp. 441–478.
Richard Schoen, Scott A. Wolpert, and Shing-Tung Yau (1980). “Geometric bounds
  on the low eigenvalues of a compact surface”, in: Geometry of the Laplace operator
  (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Univ. Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, 1979). Vol. XXXVI.
  Proc. Sympos. Pure Math. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, pp. 279–285.
Atle Selberg (1965). “On the estimation of Fourier coefficients of modular forms”, in:
  Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. VIII. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, pp. 1–15.
Yang Shen and Yunhui Wu (2023). “The Cheeger constants of random Belyi surfaces”,
  Int. Math. Res. Not. (17), pp. 15266–15298.
        (2025a). “Arbitrarily small spectral gaps for random hyperbolic surfaces with
  many cusps”, Comm. Math. Phys. 406 (8), Paper No. 190, 44.
        (2025b). “Nearly optimal spectral gaps for random Belyı̆ surfaces”. arXiv: 2511.
  02517 [math.SP].
Carl L. Siegel (1945). “A mean value theorem in geometry of numbers”, Ann. of Math.
  (2) 46, pp. 340–347.
Antoine Song (2024). “Random harmonic maps into spheres”. arXiv: 2402 . 10287
  [math.DG].
Alexander Strohmaier and Ville Uski (2013). “An algorithm for the computation of
  eigenvalues, spectral zeta functions and zeta-determinants on hyperbolic surfaces”,
  Comm. Math. Phys. 317, pp. 827–869.
Kisao Takeuchi (1977). “Arithmetic triangle groups”, J. Math. Soc. Japan 29 (1), pp. 91–
  106.
Joe Thomas (2022). “Delocalisation of eigenfunctions on large genus random surfaces”,
  Israel J. Math. 250 (1), pp. 53–83.
Ramon van Handel (2025). “The strong convergence phenomenon”. arXiv: 2507.00346
  [math.PR].
                                        1255–62


Dave Witte Morris (2015). Introduction to arithmetic groups. Deductive Press, [place of
  publication not identified], pp. xii+475.
Scott A. Wolpert (1982). “The Fenchel–Nielsen deformation”, Ann. of Math. (2) 115
  (3), pp. 501–528.
         (2010). Families of Riemann surfaces and Weil–Petersson geometry. Vol. 113.
  CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics. Conference Board of the Math-
  ematical Sciences, Washington, DC; by the American Mathematical Society, Provi-
  dence, RI, pp. viii+118.
Nicholas C. Wormald (1981). “The asymptotic connectivity of labelled regular graphs”,
  J. Combin. Theory Ser. B 31 (2), pp. 156–167.
         (1999). “Models of random regular graphs”, in: Surveys in combinatorics, 1999
  (Canterbury). Vol. 267. London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. Cambridge Univ. Press,
  Cambridge, pp. 239–298.
Alex Wright (2020). “A tour through Mirzakhani’s work on moduli spaces of Riemann
  surfaces”, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 57 (3), pp. 359–408.
Sophie Wright (2025). “Random covers of surfaces”. arXiv: 2511.22731 [math.GT].
Yunhui Wu and Yuhao Xue (2022). “Random hyperbolic surfaces of large genus have
                                  3
  first eigenvalues greater than 16 − ϵ”, Geom. Funct. Anal. 32 (2), pp. 340–410.
         (2025). “Prime geodesic theorem and closed geodesics for large genus”, J. Eur.
  Math. Soc. published online first.



                           Bram Petri
                           Institut de Mathématiques de Jussieu–Paris Rive Gauche
                           E-mail : bram.petri@imj-prg.fr
