Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                               № 1/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                           Fracture Mechanics:
                           A Nonlocal Approach


                          Nicole Buczkowski • Mikil Fo s s
                                 Petronela Radu 1




       Nonlocal models consider interactions over a range of
       distances, not just at a single point. In this snapshot,
       we give a short introduction to nonlocal modeling,
       explain how it differs from its local counterpart, and
       present an application: fracture mechanics.

1 I n t roduction

       All models are wrong, but some are useful.
       a                                                  George Box (1976)

   From weather prediction and population dynamics to bridge engineering,
mathematical models are used to describe our world on many levels. However,
as George Box noted, no model is perfectly accurate. Choosing the right one
is a balancing act: intricate models may capture many details, but are often
hard to interpret. On the other hand, simpler models usually only capture the
general features, but their simplicity often allows deeper insights.
   For example, consider the problem of evaluating whether a bridge beam
could fracture. While an intricate model might account for the number of cars,
their weight, and their speed, it may ultimately prove less effective. The key
information could be the existence of internal cracks in the beam or the exact
1   M. F. and P. R. are supported by NSF award DMS-1716790.


                                           1
composition and properties of the materials used. Thus, a simpler model of the
spread of internal cracks could be more insightful.
   The quote by George Box emphasizes the importance of a mathematical
model that gives us enough accuracy while still being relatively easy to utilize.
In this snapshot, we present nonlocal models in contrast to local models. While
most widely used models are local, we showcase an example in which nonlocal
models prove to be more accurate.

Loca l ve r s u s n o n l o c a l m o d e l i n g

Imagine a honeybee swarm where individuals move from one location to another
without collision as is explained in [2]. The self-organization behavior naturally
introduces the ideas of nonlocality. In particular, what one honeybee does
not only influences the trajectories of the honeybees near it, but also causes
a coordinated flight for the whole swarm. Similarly, in the field of dynamic
fracture, it has been shown that the stresses experienced at the tip of a crack
are not sufficient to determine the behavior at that point. Rather, one must
collect information from a neighborhood around the tip to determine how the
crack would advance.
   In contrast, local models use only the information directly available at
the point of interest, usually in the form of local differential operators. In
materials, the stress is related to the change in displacement u within a material.
Mathematically this is described by the derivative operator
                           du(x)         u(y) − u(x)
                                 = lim                .                       (1)
                            dx      y→x     y−x
The derivative operator gives the rate of increase of the function u at a specific
point x. This is why we call the derivative a local operator.
   An analogous nonlocal operator is the two-point derivative
                                Gu(x, y) = (u(y) − u(x))α(x, y).
The two-point function α quantifies the interaction between two points x and y.
Usually, the points nearest to the location of interest have the most influence,
but that influence decreases with the distance to the reference point. Indeed,
let the points at a distance greater than δ, which we call the interaction radius,
not affect each other. A possible function α which encodes the behavior is
                                    1
                         α(x, y) =    y−x , |y − x| < δ
                                      0,     otherwise.
With this choice of α, the nonlocal two-point derivative is
                                (
                                  u(y)−u(x)
                                     y−x    , |y − x| < δ
                     Gu(x, y) =                                                (2)
                                  0,          otherwise.


                                                    2
Notice how, in contrast to the local derivative operator from Equation (1), the
nonlocal derivative in Equation (2) depends on the locations of two distinct
points x and y.
   In the following, we focus on the systems where local information cannot
describe the behavior of the system well. More specifically, we look at nonlocal
modeling in fracture mechanics and how it relates to experimental data.


2 A n Application: Fracture Mechanics (Per idynamics)

The most important questions in the field of fracture mechanics are when and
where a crack will form, how quickly it will propagate, and if/how it will branch.
The answers to these questions help us control the propagation of cracks in
bridge beams, cellphone screens, and soda cans.
   The local equation to model elastic deformation 2 is given by
                                       ∂2u
                                           = ∆u + b,                                        (3)
                                       ∂t2
where u denotes displacement within the material, b is the external force, and ∆
                                ∂2    ∂2     ∂2
is the Laplace operator 3 ∆ = ∂x  2 + ∂y 2 + ∂z 2 . The Laplace operator is a local

derivative operator, which makes this theory of elastic deformation local. For
small displacements, such as the propagation of sound in a solid, Equation (3)
agrees very well with reality.
    However, near cracks in the material, the displacement changes abruptly, so
derivatives are undefined – meaning that the standard equations no longer apply.
In 2000, Stewart Silling reformulated the equations of fracture mechanics in
terms of nonlocal operators. The theory was named peridynamics, originating
from the Greek words peri, meaning “near,” and dynamics, meaning “force.”
His first paper on the subject [3] has been cited more than 4500 times at the
time of writing this snapshot. The peridynamic equation of motion is
                                       ∂2u
                                           = Lu + b,                                        (4)
                                       ∂t2
where b is the external force, and
                            Z
                   Lu(x) =                   (u(y) − u(x))µ(x, y) dy,
                                   |y−x|<δ

is the nonlocal Laplacian. The kernel of interaction µ(x, y) describes long-
range interactions between points x and y. Equation (4) has the same form as

2   We have excluded material properties for clarity.
3   The Laplace operator can be considered as the second derivative in three spatial dimensions.


                                               3
Equation (3), only the local Laplacian is replaced by its nonlocal counterpart.
Indeed, if no fracture occurs and all derivatives in the material are well-defined,
the nonlocal and local Laplacian of the displacement are nearly equal. This
gives some agreement of the nonlocal and local theories.



Expe r i m e n t a l d a t a o n f ra c t u r e ve r s u s p e r i d y n a m i c s i mu l a t i o n

After outlining the theoretical ideas behind peridynamics in fracture mechanics,
we now look at how well this theory corresponds to experimental data. We
look at an example from [1], where the authors compare the experimental data
shown in Figure 1 from [4] to a numerical simulation using peridynamics shown
in Figure 2.




Figu r e 1 : Three samples of crack propagation and branching within a material.
               Experimental data are from [4] and the measurements are added
               in [1].


   The key observation of the experimental data in Figure 1 is that the branching
occurs after propagating 50–60% of the way through the material and that the
branching angle in each sample is between 55◦ and 57◦ .
   Figure 2 shows the equivalent peridynamic simulation for different interaction
radii δ. As in the physical samples, the crack branches after traveling 50–60%
of the way through the sample. However, the branching angle in the simulation
is 45◦ , which differs from the one measured experimentally. Notice, however,
that the branching behavior of the end of the crack is similar to that observed
in the experiment. Despite the quantitative difference, the qualitative match
between the experiment and simulation is remarkable, and the peridynamic
model notably outperforms other simulation methods considered in the paper [1].


                                                         4
Figure 2 : Crack propagation simulation obtained with a peridynamics model.
          Interaction radii: (a) δ=2 mm, (b) δ=1 mm, and (c) δ=0.5 mm.


   Furthermore, the authors in [1] compared the experimental results from [4] of
the speed of the crack tip propagation to the equivalent peridynamic simulation.
Figure 3 shows the crack tip velocity starting at 0 and then shooting up
to 1500 m/s, both in experiments and simulations.




Figure 3 : Crack tip velocity in experiments [4] and the peridynamics simula-
          tions [1] with interaction radii of δ = 2 mm, 1 mm, and 0.5 mm.


   These results highlight how nonlocal models can capture essential features
of physical systems and thus outperform their local counterparts. While quan-
titative differences remain, the qualitative match with experiments shows the
promise of this approach.


                                       5
A cknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the MFO for hosting them, as well as the
organizers of the workshop “Fracture as an Emergent Phenomenon” with which
this snapshot is associated.


I m age Credits

Figure 1 From page 12 of Ref. [1]. Used with permission of the authors. This
image is excluded from the Creative Commons license of this publication and
may not be reused, distributed, or published independently from this publication
without separate permission.

Figure 2 From page 14 of Ref. [1]. Used with permission of the authors. This
image is excluded from the Creative Commons license of this publication and
may not be reused, distributed, or published independently from this publication
without separate permission.

Figure 3 From page 15 of Ref. [1]. Used with permission of the authors. This
image is excluded from the Creative Commons license of this publication and
may not be reused, distributed, or published independently from this publication
without separate permission.




                                       6
R e f e rences

[1] J. Mehrmashhadi, M. Bahadori, and F. Bobaru, On validating peridynamic
    models and a phase-field model for dynamic brittle fracture in glass, Engi-
    neering Fracture Mechanics 240 (2020), 107355.
[2] A. Mogilner and L. Edelstein-Keshet, A non-local model for a swarm, Journal
    of Mathematical Biology 38 (1999), 534–570.

[3] S. A. Silling, Reformulation of elasticity theory for discontinuities and long-
    range forces, Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 48 (2000), no. 1,
    175–209.
[4] B. M. Sundaram and H. V. Tippur, Dynamic fracture of soda-lime glass: A
    full-field optical investigation of crack initiation, propagation and branching,
    Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids 120 (2018), 132–153.




                                         7
Nicol e B u c z kow s k i i s an Assistant           Mathema t i c a l s u b j e c t s
Profe s s o r i n m a t h e m atics at Creighton     Analysis
Unive r s i t y.
                                                     Connect i o n s t o o t h e r f i e l d s
Mikil Fo s s i s a P r o f e ssor in mathematics     Enginee r i n g a n d Te c h n o l o g y
at the U n i ve r s i t y o f N ebraska-Lincoln.
                                                     License
Petro n e l a R a d u i s t h e Olson Professor in   Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0
mathe m a t i c s a t t h e University of
Nebra s k a - L i n c o l n .                        DOI
                                                     10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 1 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r s                                Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Natan D o m i n ko Ko b i l ica, Matthew K. Tam      Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de                   Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                     77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                                  Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e                    Director
                                                     Gerhard H u i s ke n
