

Achieving Fairness – Feature Column

Skip to content

Achieving Fairness

In:

2025
, 
Joseph Malkevitch
, 
Math and Social Sciences

Tagged:

fair division
, 
voting

What may surprise you is the extent to which mathematicians (and computer scientists) have systematically studied issues involving fairness...

Achieving Fairness

Joe Malkevitch

York College (CUNY)

Introduction

The experience of being alive begins with the fact
that no matter how hard one may try to put oneself in the position of
another person, for each of us, we are the center of our
existence. As a person ages from childhood we become aware there are
people close to us like our parents or guardians, possible siblings, and other
family members. We quickly learn that there other people and that in
some cases these people seem to be "better off" than we are.
Dad seems to treat me better than sister Alice while Mom seems to treat
brother Bob better than me or Alice, but Grandpa Charles seems to treat
us all equally well. We quickly develop a sense of whether we are being
treated fairly and this, as we age extends to the markers that we label
ourselves with—woman, living in the US but born in Somalia, etc.
Hopefully, whatever groups we identify with we come to have
empathy for other human beings, in particular those that are further
removed from those people we interact with regularly.

This child is looking for a fair way to share ice cream. Photo by 
Aaron Concannon
, 
CC BY-NC-ND 2.0
.

If you
have a question about an illness, about what caused the recent flooding
in your neighborhood, why the price of eggs has suddenly changed and
that your favorite cereal seems no longer easily available for purchase,
you learn who are the "experts" on questions of this
particular type. Similarly, if your toilet overflows or if as a home
owner your roof develops a leak, you learn in both of these cases it is
not a carpenter or mathematician whose services are needed but in the
first case you should call a plumber and the second a roofer. But who
are the "experts" on fairness? Perhaps when you were young, if
you felt that you were not being treated fairly you might
turn to a parent, grandparent, close friend, or a member of the clergy
for advice about what to do about your concern. More abstractly, you
might think that philosophers, lawyers, politicians, or judges might be
people who had wisdom about fairness. Are there areas of academia where
the issues of fairness are addressed? What may surprise you is the
extent to which mathematicians (and computer scientists) have
systematically studied issues involving fairness. While the mathematical tools used to get
insights into these fairness questions covers a large range, a
surprisingly large amount of the scholarly fairness literature is
readable by individuals with a relatively small amount of mathematical
background. Many of these fairness questions emerge from issues related
to trying to run countries committed to democracy in a way that respects
the rights of its citizens and seeks input from society members with
different views and values.

Sample Fairness Questions/Situations

What follows are a small sample of
fairness questions/situations that have been studied to varying degrees
by the mathematics community. Many of these settings overlap in the way
that mathematics can be used in getting insights into the problem.
Historically, progress on one kind of fairness problem has often brought
about progress in how to be fair in other situations. New fairness
problems lead to new methods useful in older problems and sometimes new
problems lead to new methods and insights useful to problems studied in
the past. Rarely does mathematical progress close off a field of
research. Each new result typically spawns new questions that foster
new progress and in turn new problems to address.

Apportionment

The US Constitution requires that a census be
taken. The number of Senators that each state has is two regardless
of the population of the state, as a way to recognize that geographic
regions to some extent affect the interests of the people in rural and
low density parts of the US and those living in high population cities
such as Los Angeles or Chicago. However, one might argue that it is not
fair to the people of California that Hawaii and Idaho have two Senators
just the way that California does.

In the other part of the US
legislative system, the House of Representatives, the 
Fourteenth Amendment
 directs, "Representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each state."  However, there is the mathematical issue that if a
state has 10 percent of the US population it is currently entitled to 43.5 seats
in the House of Representatives. Should it get 43, 44 or some other
integer number of seats? A fraction of a person can't be sent to the
House of Representatives. Mathematicians have developed a rich
collection of insights into different ways that seats might
be distributed.

Disaster relief 

After a natural
disaster caused by a hurricane, flooding, earthquake or wildfire,
sometimes funds are set aside to help those harmed to recover and
rebuild their lives. If the claims made against the disaster relief fund
exceed the funds available, what might be a fair way to distribute the
funds?

Food Banks

In many parts of the United States, there are organizations that
help provide food to the hungry. These organizations sometimes are known as food banks. Food banks
have to decide how to allocate the food that they get to the
outlets that actually distribute the food. The issue arises
how such allocations can be done fairly. (The 
February 2021 Feature Column
 discusses another mathematical question involving food banks: what is the best way to allocate volunteers?)

Estate division

In some situations, when a person dies the person's
heirs are to share the proceeds of the dead person's estate. This estate
may be only money or it may be a mixture of money and other possessions—a house, art collection, rugs, etc. How can the estate be fairly
divided where there are several heirs? Similar issues arise in settling
how to distribute jointly owned items in a divorce settlement.

Fair matchings

Given two equal-sized groups of claimants,
where each group has provided strict rankings of the members of the
other group, when can the two groups be paired off so that the result is
stable? Here stable means that no pair of claimants matched can do
better by agreeing to swap the partners that they were
assigned. One of the best-known examples of such a system is the system
that is used by hospitals who need to have residencies filled and many
medical school graduates who need a residency assignment to complete
their medical school training. Other applications include assigning
workers to jobs. Mathematicians and other scholars have developed many
variants of the original work due to Dave Gale (1921-2008) and Lloyd
Shapely (1923-2016). Thus, there might be a difference in size between
the two groups to be matched or the rankings might not be strict and
allow ties.

Fair games

While the history of using
mathematics to get insight into games has many roots in many cultures,
in relatively recent times the major catalyst in setting of interest in
games was the Hungarian-born mathematician John von Neumann (1903-1957).

Photo of John von
Neumann, 
by permission of Los Angeles National Security
.

John von Neumann collaborated with the economist Oskar Morgenstern (1902-1977)
in writing a book entitled 
Games and Economic Behavior,
 which set off a
torrent of interest in studying games and fairness questions. 
As children and adults we often get to play various games. Many of these games involve a mixture of luck and
skill. Mathematicians have looked at the issue of
determining if various classes of games are fair. To make it
easier to answer fairness questions about games, mathematicians work with
stylized settings where competition occurs
between two or more players. These games are often shown (modeled) as a
table with choices for one player (claimant) set out in rows, and the
choices for the other player tied to the choice of a column. An entry in
the table (matrix) such as $(-5, 6)$ means the choices of actions by the
players result in the outcome of -5 to the row player, and an outcome of
6 to the column player. What units are these payoffs in? Here we
interpret -5 as Row losing 5 dollars and 6 as winning 6 dollars. The
stakes that change hands in the game might just as easily be chocolate bars or jelly
beans.

In the diagram below, the players Row and Column simultaneously
choose Row 1 or Row 2 and Column I or Column II, respectively—thus, if Row chooses Row 2 and Column chooses Column I, then Row
loses 15 and Column wins 15. 

Column I 

 Column II 

 Row 1 

 $(3, -3)$ 

 $(-2,
2)$

 Row 2 

 $(-15, 15)$ 

 $(10, -10)$

 This game is special because it is zero-sum, i.e.,
gains by Row correspond on each play (the game may be played several
times, one round after another) and the lose to Column add to zero. The
game might be played once or over and over again. When Row wins, Row
gets either 3 or 10 while when Column wins Column gets 2 or 15. It might
appear because 13 is less than 17 that Column has an advantage in this
game. But this game, if played many times, on average the amount of
money that changes changes hands is zero, and most people would thus
regard it as a fair game.

 Fair elections
(voting)

In many situations there are actions (or candidates to
be chosen) which must be selected by a group of people who have
different views. In such situations, one
can conduct a vote or an election. Each eligible voter is
asked to produce a ballot which captures their views about the
alternative actions (candidates or choices) and based on these ballots
an election decision method or algorithm is decided on in
advance of the voting. Mathematicians (and political scientists,
philosophers and economists) have developed many different types of
ballots to evaluate or rank the candidates or actions and many different
decision methods, tied to the kind of ballot used to find the winner
(winners) or declare a tie. Usually, the decision method is
designed to be decisive, meaning that there is a single
outcome selected by the voters as the choice for society.

Different election decision methods will select a single
winner based on this set of ballots:

Which candidate in your view most deserves to win this election?
What method of choosing a winner will result in this candidate winning?
What fairness properties does your algorithm (method) for picking a
winner obey?

Fair Allocation

What is an
allocation situation?

A limited supply of
items or prizes (e.g. money, food, legislative seats, etc.) is
to be distributed fairly to $m$ claimants, based on some
collection of claims each made by a single claimant. Different claimants
may have different views about what it means to be treated fairly, and
the different individuals or institutions that might be trying to be
fair might not agree what constitutes being fair.

How should we allocate slices from a pizza with different toppings? (Photo by 
Hajime Nakano
, 
CC-BY 2.0
.)

One of the
first useful things that a mathematical analysis brings about is making
sure that the terminology used in the problem setting is clear and
precise. How many claimants are there? What one might do could vary
significantly depending on whether there were 2 claimants, 10 claimants,
or 50,000 claimants. What is the nature of the prizes or items that are
to be distributed? Though money is easily divisible, one can't divide art works (paintings,
rugs, books, houses) into fractional parts. It would not make much sense
for a painting by Van Gogh to be cut up into three parts of the same
area. Sometimes there may be several identical non-subdividable items
that are to be distributed, but what is much more common is that there
are indivisible items which can be sensibly assigned a value, and that
while only one person gets each indivisible item, the claimants can get
a "fair share" of the items in terms of the total
value of what was distributed. Sometimes all of the claimants and
the size of their claims is known in advance but in some problems, known
as online situations, the claims arrive one at a time and one has to
have a scheme in which one tries to be fair in this environment. Another
issue to be considered when evaluating fairness methods is how much
computational difficulty there is in finding or computing the
answer, even when one can prove that there is a fair
solution. Issues of computational complexity come into play in addition
to the question of whether one can prove that there is a fair solution.
Sometimes one feasible fair solution can be found quickly while a
different fair solution might not be practical to find. Sometimes
approximate fair solutions can be proved to exist—no claimant is
treated significantly worse than another, and one can find such an
approximate solution rapidly even when the number of claimants or the
number of prizes (chores) is very large.

What characteristics
do the claimants have? Rarely is it the case that claimants
are completely identical. Sometimes claimants are people, sometimes
states, sometimes corporations, etc. If the claimants are
people, some claimants may be old and some may be young; in
fact, some claimants may be so young that they are being
represented by someone (or a legal entity) other than
themselves. 

Typically some kind of procedure or algorithm is
used to assign the prizes to the claimants. There are many issues
related to the nature of these procedures.

Does the procedure
have some kind of built-in bias? Some procedures may not
treat people of different genders equally. Some procedures may treat poor people
differently from rich people, and there may be different approaches to
being fair for people under the age of 18 and over the age of 75. Thus,
a commuter railroad may have one price for children under 5 and special
discounts for people who are over 70.

For now, consider
allocation problems where the items to be allocated can not be
subdivided. Each item must be assigned to one claimant.
Imagine we have a collection of claimants and that the items to be
allocated have been assigned. The items being allocated could have
positive value to the claimant or negative value
to the claimant. Sometimes items to be allocated that have negative
value are referred to as being "chores," while those with
positive value are called "prizes." In some settings a mixture
of prizes and chores are called 
manna
. These environments turn out to
have rather different challenges for obtaining fairness
results.

Theoretical mathematical analysis typically proceeds
by having a collection of undefined terms, a collection of defined words
building on these undefined terms, and a collection of rules or axioms
involve these undefined terms. Now one takes this framework
and using the laws of logic makes deductions of theorems,
based on the axioms. In this spirit, here are some of the terms that have
been defined to investigate fairness issues for allocation
situations.

a. Proportionality

In a fairness situation
where one can assign to the prizes or chores a value, a distribution of
the items is said to be proportional if, when there are $n$
claimants, each claimant gets at least $1/n$ of the total value of the
manna—chores or prizes.

b. Envy free

An
envy free assignment of items in a fairness situation occurs when each
claimant $i$ accepts the items assigned, rather than claimant $i$ saying they
would rather have the assignment that was given to claimant $j$. In some
cases, claimant $i$ will not envy claimant $j$ when the amount $i$ gets is
equal to the amount claimant $j$ got. If there are two claimants and only one
positively valued indivisible prize to be distributed, then there is no
system of allocating the prize which will be envy free—the claimant
who does not get the prize will always envy the person who does. For
some situations, however, an envy free solution will be possible, and
this is a desirable feature of fair allocations.

c. EF1

 Since there are situations where envy free allocations to the
claimants are not possible, scholars have to consider the notation of
how the envy free requirement, as desirable as this unobtainable goal
might be, be relaxed so that a "fair" allocation can be
carried out.

The EF1 rule is obeyed when if one specific fixed
item is disregarded when analyzing whether or not a particular
allocation is viewed as envy free. Thus, while claimant $i$ will envy
claimant $j$ when item $I$ is part of what is assigned to claimant $j$, if $i$
disregards that $I$ was given to $j$, $i$ is no longer envious of what
claimant $j$ got. 

One can modify the EF1 "rule" or
axiom in various ways. One way is known as EFX or EFx, where instead of
considering envy with regard to a fixed particular item, one ranges over
being envy free with regard to any single item rather than one
particular item. One can consider algorithms that produce envy free
allocations when several items rather than one specific item $i$ or any
specific item is taken into consideration. Another approach is that of
taking a pair of items in an allocation and swapping them. Thus, if item
$U$ was assigned to claimant $i$ and $V$ was assigned to claimant $j$ and the
total allocation (the way all items were allocated) was envied by one of
the claimants, would that individual cease to envy the other person when
the item $U$ went to $j$ and item $V$ went to $i$? 

Conclusion

The range of examples
where fairness situations come into play is vast. Mathematicians and computer scientists have played a growing
role in trying to understand and solve fairness problems. Perhaps you
can provide some examples of situations where communities could get new mathematical insight into questions of fairness. 

References

Aziz, H., Rauchecker, G., Schryen, G., and
Walsh, T. (2017). Approximation 
 algorithms for max-min share
allocations of indivisible chores and goods. In Proceedings of the
Thirty-First AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
335–341.

M. Balinski and H. Young, Fair Representation,
2nd edition, Brookings Institution, Washington, 2001.

Brams,
S.J. and A.D. Taylor (1999) : “ The Win-Win Solution: Guaranteeing
Fair Shares to Everybody”, New York: W.W. Norton.

Budish, E. (2011). The combinatorial assignment problem: Approximate
competitive equilibrium from equal incomes. Journal of Political
Economy, 119(6):1061–1103.

P. di Cortona, C. Manzi, A.
Pennisi, F. Ricca, and B. Simeone, Evaluation and Optimization of
Electoral Systems, SIAM, Philadelphia, 1999. 

Edelman, P. and
P.C. Fishburn (2001): “ Fair Division of Indivisible Items
Among People with Similar Preferences”, Mathematical Social
Sciences, Vol. 
 41, 327-347.

Gale, D., and L. Shapley
(1962): "College Admissions and the Stability of 
Marriage", American Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 69, 9-15.  

Luce, R. Duncan and H. Raiffa, Games and Decisions, Revised edition,
1989.

Malkevitch, J., 
Rationality and Game Theory
.

Evangelos Markakis. 2017. Approximation Algorithms and Hardness
Results for Fair Division with Indivisible Goods. In Trends in
Computational Social Choice, Ulle Endriss (Ed.). AI Access, Chapter 12,
231–247.

Ariel D. Procaccia. 2016. Cake Cutting
Algorithms. In Handbook of Computational Social Choice, Felix Brandt,
Vincent Conitzer, Ulle Endriss, Jérôme Lang, and Ariel D.
Procaccia (Eds.). Cambridge University Press, Chapter 13,
311–329.

Rapoport, A. and M. Guyer, D. Gordon, The 2x2
game, U. Michigan Press, 1976.

Jack M. Robertson and William A.
Webb. 1998. Cake-Cutting Algorithms—Be Fair if You Can. A K
Peters.

Roth, Alvin E., and Marilda Sotomayor, Two-sided
matching, Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications 1 (1992):
485-541.

A. Sen, Inequality Reexamined, Harvard U. Press,
Cambridge, 1992.

Hugo Steinhaus. 1948. The Problem of Fair
Division. Econometrica 16 (1948), 101–104.

Straffin,
P., Game Theory and Strategy, Mathematical Association of America,
1993.

Warut Suksompong. 2017. Fairly Allocating Contiguous
Blocks of Indivisible Items. In Proceedings of the 10th
International Symposium on Algorithmic Game Theory (SAGT’17).
333–344.

Share this:

Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)

Facebook

Share on X (Opens in new window)

X

Like this:
Like

Loading…

2025-11-01

Previous Post: 
The Hypergeometric Flower Pot
Next Post: 
Everything I Need to Know About Polygons I Learned from My Pre-Kindergartner

1 Comment

This may be the first time I have read a serious mathematical article without formulas, that anyone should be able to understand. This shows how far reaching mathematics is, and also the author’s skill.

To be fair, I must point out that the first sentence in the conclusion should end with “is vast”, not “are vast”.

Leave a Reply 
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.

Required fields are marked 
*
Comment 
*

HTML tags are not allowed.
Name 
*

Email 
*

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

85,090 Spambots Blocked by 
Simple Comments

Notify me of follow-up comments by email.

Notify me of new posts by email.
 Notify me of followup comments via e-mail. You can also 
subscribe
 without commenting.

JavaScript must be turned on to leave a comment.

Search
Subscribe to Feature Column via Email

Enter your email address to subscribe to Feature Column and receive notifications of new posts by email.

							Email Address						

							Subscribe						

Recent Posts
Another Look at Circles and Squares

The Shapley Value, or How to Split a Bill in n! Easy Steps

The Story Your Ballot Doesn’t Tell

Weekly Maintenance Message

Puzzling Like the Seventeenth Century

Categories

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

Adam A. Smith

Adriana Salerno

Algebra and Number Theory

Allechar Serrano López

Anil Venkatesh

Anna Haensch

Archive

Audrey St. John

Bevin Maultsby

Bianca Thompson

Bill Casselman

Colm Mulcahy

Courtney Gibbons

David Austin

Deepayan Sarkar

Diana Davis

Discrete Math and Combinatorics

Étienne Ghys

Geometry and Topology

Guillermo Fereyra

History of mathematics

Holley Friedlander

Jessica Sidman

John Eggers

Joseph Malkevitch

Josh Leys

Math and Arts/Humanities

Math and Social Sciences

Math and Technology

Math and the Sciences

Mathematics and Biology

Moira Chas

Noah Giansiracusa

Patrick Ion

Probability and Statistics

Real and Complex Analysis

Sara Chari

Sara Stoudt

Sarah Wolff

Steven H. Weintraub

Sunil Chebolu

Tamsyn Morrill

Teaching and Learning Mathematics

Tony Phillips

Uncategorized

Ursula Whitcher

Tags
5G

Alan Turing

algebraic geometry

ams

astronauts

Branko Grünbaum

cantor set

chess

Claude Shannon

computability

cryptography

Desargues

economics

elliptic curves

epidemic

Euclidean geometry

feature column history

games

game theory

generating functions

genetics

Geoffrey Colin Shephard

herd immunity

Higgs boson

information theory

lattices (groups)

Lie groups

Machine learning

measles

medieval

partitions

periods

persi diaconis

physics

poetry

polytopes and polyhedra

primes

probability

SEIR model

statistics

string theory

tic-tac-toe

tilings

video games

voting

Meta

Log in

Entries feed

Comments feed

WordPress.org

					 Designed using 
Hoot Business
. Powered by 
WordPress
.				

%d

