                                                  GREENBERG-SHALOM’S COMMENSURATOR
                                                     HYPOTHESIS AND APPLICATIONS

                                             NIC BRODY, DAVID FISHER, MAHAN MJ, AND WOUTER VAN LIMBEEK




arXiv:2308.07785v3 [math.GR] 7 Nov 2025
                                                 Abstract. We discuss many surprising implications of a positive an-
                                                 swer to a question raised in some cases by Greenberg in the 1970s and
                                                 more generally by Shalom in the early 2000s. We refer to this posi-
                                                 tive answer as the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. This hypothesis then
                                                 says that any infinite discrete subgroup of a semisimple Lie group with
                                                 dense commensurator is a lattice in a product of some factors. For some
                                                 applications it is natural to extend the hypothesis to cover semisimple
                                                 algebraic groups over other fields as well.




                                                                             Contents
                                            1. Introduction                                                                 1
                                            2. Notation, standing assumptions, and definitions of irreducibility            3
                                            3. Irreducible groups are lattices                                              6
                                            4. Coherence                                                                   13
                                            5. Margulis-Zimmer conjecture                                                  15
                                            6. Automorphism groups of trees                                                16
                                            7. Rank gradient and small generating sets                                     20
                                            Appendix A. Background on algebraic groups, irreducibility and
                                                          Venkataramana’s Lemma                                            27
                                            References                                                                     34



                                                                         1. Introduction
                                             Let G be a real or p-adic semisimple Lie group with finite center and
                                          without compact factors, or a finite product of such groups. More precisely,
                                          we consider G = G(k) where k is a local field of characteristic zero and G is
                                          either a semisimple algebraic group defined over k or a product of semisimple
                                             Department of Mathematics, University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa
                                          Cruz, CA, USA
                                             Department of Mathematics, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
                                             School of Mathematics, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai,
                                          India
                                             Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University
                                          of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
                                             Date: November 10, 2025.
                                                                                   1
                    the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                          2

 algebraic groups over possibly different fields of this type. Let Γ ⊆ G be
 a discrete subgroup with commensurator ∆. Borel proved that if Γ is an
 arithmetic lattice, then the commensurator contains the rational points of G
 and in particular is almost dense in G [Bor66]. Here, ‘almost dense’ means
 its closure has finite index in G. Greenberg (for G = SO(n, 1)) and Shalom
 (in general) asked whether almost dense commensurator of a discrete, Zariski
 dense subgroup Γ detects its arithmeticity. We formulate the positive answer
 to this question as a hypothesis, since here we are primarily interested in
 the implications if it is true.
 Hypothesis 1.1 (Greenberg [Gre74], Shalom, see [LLR11]). Let G be a
 semisimple Lie group with finite center and without compact factors. Sup-
 pose Γ ⊆ G is a discrete, Zariski dense subgroup of G whose commensurator
 ∆ ⊆ G is almost dense. Then Γ is an arithmetic lattice in G.
     We will refer to Hypothesis 1.1 as the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. We
  remark here that the hypothesis seems quite plausible on first encounter,
  and Greenberg and Shalom both seem inclined to believe it. On the other
  hand, the many implications of the hypothesis discussed here may cast some
  doubt on the likelihood that it is correct. The purpose of this article is
  to exhibit these connections between the hypothesis and other problems,
  many of which do not a priori involve commensurators. Taken together they
  indicate a point of view from which one may at least view the problems as
  connected, whether one views it as evidence for or against the hypothesis or
  for or against any of the results the hypothesis implies. A short overview of
  these applications is given below.
(3.1) A question of Benoist on existence of discrete, irreducible free or sur-
      face subgroups in products of simple real and p-adic Lie groups (see
      Corollaries 3.2 and 3.3).
(3.2) A conjecture of Lyndon-Ullman and Kim-Koberda on groups generated
      by parabolics (see Theorem 3.10).
(3.3) Existence of elements with integral traces in hyperbolic 3-manifold
      groups (see Theorem 3.13).
  (4) A question of Serre on coherence of SL(2, Z[1/p]) and related groups, and
      a problem of Wise whether coherence is geometric (see Theorem 4.2).
  (5) The Margulis-Zimmer conjecture on arithmeticity of commensurated
      subgroups of S-arithmetic lattices (see Theorem 5.3).
     We believe that one of the main sources of motivation for Shalom’s ques-
  tion [LLR11] that led to Hypothesis 1.1 is the Margulis-Zimmer Conjec-
  ture 5.1 mentioned in Item (5) above. The Margulis-Zimmer Conjecture
  [SW13] seeks to classify commensurated subgroups of higher rank lattices.
  In Remark 5.2(3), we shall spell out this connection.
     A key impetus for this paper is a close connection between commensura-
  tors and irreducibility. While this idea has been commonplace for lattices,
  it does not seem to have been noticed in this context before. In section
  2 we lay out some key definitions for irreducibility and then make the key
3                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

connection in Lemma 2.11. In Proposition 3.1 this is used to show that
the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis implies that many irreducible groups are
automatically lattices.
   To close out this introduction, we discuss the quite limited progress on
Greenberg-Shalom’s question: First, Margulis proved that non-arithmetic
lattices have discrete commensurators, thereby resolving Greenberg-
Shalom’s question for lattices. At roughly the same time and apparently
unaware of Margulis’ work, Greenberg proved Hypothesis 1.1 for finitely gen-
erated subgroups of G = SL(2, R) [Gre74]. Building on work by Leininger-
Long-Reid [LLR11], Mj proved Hypothesis 1.1 for finitely generated sub-
groups of SL(2, C) [Mj11]. For all other cases of G, as well as general infin-
itely generated subgroups of the above, Hypothesis 1.1 is open. Koberda-Mj
proved the hypothesis for normal subgroups Γ of arithmetic lattices in rank
1 with positive first Betti number [KM21, KM24]. Fisher-Mj-Van Limbeek
proved the hypothesis for all normal subgroups of lattices [FMvL24]. Green-
berg (for SO(n, 1)) and Mj (in general) also proved that any group satisfying
the conditions of the hypothesis has full limit set [Gre74, Mj11].

Acknowledgments. The second author thanks Yves Benoist for a very
useful conversation in Zurich in January 2019. The authors thank Michael
Larsen and Sandeep Varma for useful conversations about local fields of
characteristic p. They also thank Simon Machado for conversations about
approximate subgroups and commensurated approximate subgroups as well
as for reminding them of the example of Burger and Mozes. We also thank
Marco Linton, Sam Mellick and Alan Reid for corrections to and comments
on a preliminary version of this paper. Finally the authors thank Alan Reid
for encouragement.
   David Fisher is supported by NSF DMS-2246556. Mahan Mj is supported
by the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India, under project
no.12-R&D-TFR-5.01-0500; and in part by a DST JC Bose Fellowship, and
an endowment from the Infosys Foundation. Wouter van Limbeek is sup-
ported by NSF DMS-2203867.

      2. Notation, standing assumptions, and definitions of
                           irreducibility
   In this section, we will fix some standing assumptions that will be in place
for the rest of this article. Subsequent sections may have further assumptions
that will be detailed at the beginning of each section.
Standing assumptions 2.1.
    • I is a finite set indexing local fields ki , i ∈ I, of characteristic zero.
    • I also indexes a set of groups Gi which are connected, absolutely
      simple, isotropic,Qadjoint algebraic groups over ki . We set Gi :=
      Gi (ki ) and G = i∈I Gi . When not otherwise specified, we equip G
      with the analytic topology.
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            4

Remark 2.2. Much (but not all) of our discussion also applies when ki are
local fields of positive characteristic, and the Greenberg-Shalom problem
can be formulated, and is open and interesting, in that setting as well.
  We now make two definitions:
Definition 2.3. A subgroup Θ < G is almost dense if its analytic closure
has finite index in G.
Definition 2.4. A subgroup Γ < G will be called a standard commensurated
subgroup if it has unbounded projection to each factor and almost dense
commensurator ∆ < G.
Notation 2.5. Let G be as above. For i ∈ I, weQdenote by pri : G → Gi the
canonical projection. For J ⊆ I, we set GJ := j∈J Gj , and prJ : G → GJ
denotes the canonical projection.
  We introduce the following the following irreducibility assumption:
Definition 2.6. Let G be as in the above standing assumptions and let
L ⊆ G be a subgroup. We say L is strongly irreducible if for every proper
subset J ⊊ I, the projection prJ (L) ⊆ GJ is almost dense.
   From the above definition, it is not at all obvious that questions involving
general discrete (or closed) groups can be reduced to strongly irreducible
discrete (or closed) groups, i.e. if Θ ⊆ G is a discrete subgroup, it is not
clear there exists J ⊆ I such that prJ (Θ) ⊆ GJ is discrete and strongly
irreducible. We now introduce a notion of irreducibility for which reductions
are easier. In Appendix A.3, we will prove these are equivalent.
   To make our second notion of irreducibility precise we need to pass to the
case where the only fields allowed are Qp and R and not finite extensions
of those fields. Many readers may already be assuming that and those that
are need not pay too much attention to the next two paragraphs on a first
reading.     Q
   Let G = i Gi be as in Standing Assumptions 2.1, and let Γ ⊆ G be a
discrete subgroup. We Q want to define what it means for Γ to be irreducible
in the product G = i Gi . There are two obvious ways one might reduce
the study of Γ to a simpler scenario, namely by passing to either a quotient
of G or a subgroup of G. We can pass to a quotient precisely when the
projection of Γ to some proper subset of factors is discrete. To see when one
may pass to a subgroup is more involved, and we need to introduce some
notation.
   We set Q∞ := R and if p is a finite prime or ∞, we denote by Ip ⊆ I
the subset of Qp -analytic factors of G (soQI∞ denotes the collection of
archimedean factors), and we write Gp := i∈Ip Gi for their product. We
restrict scalars
         Q       on all factors to Qp , and define the Qp -algebraic group
Rp G := i∈Ip Rki /Qp Gi . We write Rp G := (Rp G)(Qp ). Of course we have
Rp G ∼= Gp as Qp -analytic groups, but Rp G comes equipped with a Zariski
5                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

topology as a Qp -algebraic group. We will refer to this as the Qp -Zariski
topology on Gp . Note that given a discrete group Γ ⊆ G, we could first
project to any subproduct GJ such that prJ (Γ) is discrete, and then pass to
                    Q          Qp
the subgroup H := p prJp (Γ) , where the closure is taken with respect to
the Qp -Zariski topology on Rp G. This motivates the following definition:
Definition 2.7. A subgroup Θ is irreducible inQG if for every proper subset
of factors J ⊊ I, the projection of Θ to GJ = j∈J Gj is not discrete, and
for every p (a finite prime or ∞), the projection of Θ to Gp is Qp -Zariski
dense.
   Most irreducible groups we consider will be discrete, but we do not assume
this for the purposes of the above definition.
Remark 2.8. If G is simple, then irreducibility is equivalent to Qp -Zariski
density.
Lemma 2.9. Any discrete irreducible subgroup Θ ⊆ G has unbounded pro-
jections to every simple factor Gi . Moreover the set of elements projected to
any bounded open set in G/Gi is already unbounded in Gi .
Proof. If G itself is simple, this follows from Zariski density of Θ. If there
is more than one factor, then for any factor Gi , the image of Θ in G/Gi is
indiscrete. For any bounded open set U ⊆ G/Gi , the set ΘU of elements of
Θ with image in U is infinite and has discrete projection to Gi , and therefore
is unbounded in Gi .                                                         □
  To clarify the role of having two definitions, note that irreducibility seems
much easier to establish than strong irreducibility, since the former only
requires Qp -Zariski density of projections to Rp G, whereas the latter requires
almost density in the analytic topology of all subproduct projections. On
the other hand, strong irreducibility is a much more powerful property to
use in applications. Since we can verify that the two notions are in fact
equivalent, this apparent discrepancy is very useful.
Proposition 2.10. A discrete subgroup is irreducible if and only if it is
strongly irreducible.
  This proposition will be proved in Appendix A.3 where we will also prove
the following Lemma which we use frequently in applications and which
provides the connection between irreducible groups and commensurators.
Lemma 2.11. Let J index a collection of factors
                                            Q of G such that the fields ki
for i ∈ J are all non-archimedean. Let K ⊂ J Gj be a maximal compact
open. Let ΓK = Γ ∩ (GJ c × K). Then prJc (ΓK ) is a discrete irreducible
subgroup of GJ c with dense commensurator prJc (Γ).
  We give here the proof for two factors one of which is a connected real
Lie group, the other p-adic. This is short, simple, and illustrates the key
connection. The more involved proof with many factors will be given in
Appendix A.3.
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            6

Proof for two factors. Let G = G1 ×G2 and assume G2 is defined over a non-
archimedean field and G1 is a connected real Lie group. By van Dantzig’s
theorem, G2 contains a compact open subgroup K2 which is commensurated
by G2 , see Proposition A.1. That proposition also implies that ΓK = Γ ∩
(G1 × K2 ) is commensurated by Γ simply by looking at the projection to
G2 . Now ΓK projects discretely to G1 since it is discrete in G1 × K2 and
the fiber of the projection G1 × K2 → G1 is compact. Now pr1 (ΓK ) is
a discrete group that is unbounded by Lemma 2.9 and has almost dense
commensurator pr1 (Γ). This implies that the Lie algebra of the Zariski
closure of pr1 (ΓK ) is invariant under G and hence equals G, i.e. pr1 (ΓK ) is
Zariski dense, which is all we needed to show.                               □


                  3. Irreducible groups are lattices
3.1. Irreducible groups in products of semisimple Lie groups. We
can now give the first application of the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis.
Aside from its intrinsic interest, this result will provide an important con-
nection to other applications as well.

Proposition 3.1. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1. Let G be
as in Standing assumptions 2.1 with at least two factors, and assume at least
one factor is nonarchimedean. Then any discrete and irreducible subgroup
Γ ⊆ G is an irreducible lattice.

Proof. If G has an archimedean factor, let G0 denote the product of all
archimedean factors and Gna the product of all nonarchimedean factors. If
there is no archimedean factor, let G0 be one of the nonarchimedean factors
and Gna the product of the remaining factors. Let pr0 denote the projection
to G0 .
   Let Kna ⊆ G+    na be a maximal compact open subgroup. Let Γna ⊆ Γ
denote the subgroup that maps into Kna under projection to Gna . Then
pr0 (Γna ) ⊆ G0 is irreducible (by Proposition 2.10), discrete and has commen-
surator containing the dense subgroup pr0 (Γ) ⊆ G0 . In particular pr0 (Γna )
is Zariski dense in G0 (see Lemma A.7), and hence by the Greenberg-
Shalom hypothesis, is a lattice. It then follows that Γ ⊆ G is a lattice
by Lemma A.18.                                                              □

   We present below two consequences of Proposition 3.1. The proofs are
postponed to Section 6.2 as in some places they will need some technical
results on automorphism groups of trees.

Corollary 3.2. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis and suppose G
has no archimedean factors and |I| ≥ 2. Then there is no irreducible discrete
surface group or irreducible discrete finitely generated free group in G. If in
addition all simple factors of G have rank one, then there is no discrete
surface group in G.
7                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

   We note here that the first conclusion follows if one knows that an irre-
ducible lattice in a product cannot be a free or surface group. There are
many simple ways to verify this.
   We call a surface group Λ in PSL(2, R) algebraic if Λ < PSL(2, Q). By
finite generation of surface groups it follows that Λ < PSL(2, k) for some
number field k. We assume that k is minimal. Let Ok be the ring of integers
of k. Then we have:
Corollary 3.3. Let Λ be an algebraic surface group and assume the
Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. Then Γ := Λ ∩ PSL(2, Ok ) is infinite, com-
mensurated by Λ and Zariski dense in PSL(2, k).
Historical notes and questions:
We refer the reader to Section 6.2 for proofs of the above two corollaries.
However, a word is in order regarding the history of the circle of questions
that leads to Corollaries 3.2 and 3.3.
   The existence of discrete irreducible surface subgroups in products of p-
adic groups is a folklore problem that was widely discussed at MSRI in 2015.
A variant for actions on products of trees was asked explicitly by Fisher-
Larsen-Spatzier-Stover [FLSS18]. We shall discuss this in Section 6. In a
conversation in January 2019, Yves Benoist pointed out to the second author
that it was also unknown if there are irreducible free groups in products of
real and p-adic Lie groups or irreducible surface groups in products of real
Lie groups. In fact, Benoist first informally posed this question as far back
as 2003 or 2004. We thank Tsachik Gelander for first telling us the rough
age of Benoist’s question.
   Further, Long and Reid, using some ideas of Magnus [Mag73], constructed
an explicit surface group in PGL(2, Q2 ) × PGL(2, Q3 ) generated by the two
matrices:                                    1      
                              3 0                8   9
                       a=            ,   b = 1 41
                              0 31              32   4
This is an orbifold group with an index 4 subgroup that corresponds to a
cover by a surface of genus two. Extensive computations by Long-Reid, Agol
and Brody suggest that this example is a discrete, irreducible subgroup of
the product but according to Proposition 3.1, this would give a negative
answer to Greenberg-Shalom’s Question 1.1. It is worth comparing with
the computer-assisted results of Kim-Koberda [KK22] that are relevant to
another application below (see Section 3.2), where groups were shown to be
non-free by finding extremely long relators. In fact, R .Yaari recently showed
that in that context, groups with arbitrarily long shortest relators necessarily
occur [Yaa25]. If Hypothesis 1.1 is correct, then the computational evidence
above about the Long-Reid group only indicates that one needs extremely
long words in a and b to find elements of integral trace.
   In Corollaries 3.2 and 3.3, we require at least one factor to be totally
disconnected (i.e. a p-adic Lie group). As mentioned above, the second
author learned of variants of this question where both factors are real Lie
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                           8

groups from Yves Benoist in January 2019. The simplest and perhaps most
intriguing case is:
Question 3.4 (Benoist). Is there a free group that acts properly discontin-
uously and irreducibly on H2 × H2 ?
   We believe the requirement of a totally disconnected factor in Proposition
3.1 is an artefact of the method rather than a genuine difference. By analogy
with Proposition 3.1 we propose the following strengthening of Benoist’s
question:
Problem 3.5. Let G1 , G2 be real semisimple Lie groups with finite cen-
ter and no compact factors, and suppose ∆ ⊆ G1 × G2 is a discrete and
irreducible subgroup. Is ∆ an arithmetic lattice?
   Just as in Problem 3.1, irreducible groups ∆ as in the above problem
give rise to objects in one factor with large commensurator. But since G2
is no longer totally disconnected, they are no longer groups: More precisely,
consider Γ := ∆ ∩ (G1 × U ) where U ⊆ G2 is an open neighborhood of
identity with compact closure. Note that Γ is no longer a subgroup, but only
an approximate subgroup. This approximate subgroup is commensurated by
∆ in the sense of [Mac23b, Definition 2.1.5]. For completeness, we include
the relevant definitions here.
Definition 3.6. Let Θ be a subset of a locally compact group G. We say
that Θ is an approximate subgroup if
   (1) Θ is symmetric, i.e. Θ = Θ−1 ,
   (2) 1 ∈ Θ, and
   (3) there exists a finite set F ⊂ G such that Θ2 ⊂ F Θ.

Definition 3.7. Let X, Y be subsets of a locally compact group G. We say
that X, Y are commensurable if there exists a finite set F ⊂ G such that
that X ⊂ F Y ∩ Y F and Y ⊂ F X ∩ XF . We say that g ∈ G commensurates
X if gXg −1 and X are commensurable.
  By analogy with Proposition 3.1 we suggest the following variation of
Greenberg-Shalom’s Question 1.1 as a way of approaching Problem 3.5:
Question 3.8. Let G be as in the Standing Assumptions 2.1 and let Γ be a
discrete, Zariski dense, approximate subgroup with almost dense commen-
surator. Is Γ an approximate lattice?
   We remark here that for approximate subgroups of G, there is a well-
defined notion of being an approximate lattice and of arithmeticity, and
Machado (for real higher rank Lie groups) [Mac23a] and Hrushovski (in gen-
eral) [Hru20] have simultaneously classified approximate lattices in products
of simple algebraic groups defined over local fields: namely, for any approxi-
mate lattice Λ ⊆ G, we can decompose G = G1 ×G2 such that Λ is commen-
surable to a product of a lattice in G1 and an arithmetic approximate lattice
9                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

in G2 . Here, an arithmetic approximate lattice in G is either an arithmetic
lattice or is obtained as the intersection of an irreducible lattice in G × H
with G × U , where U is an open neighborhood of identity in H. For a thor-
ough account of the state of the art on approximate lattices, see Machado’s
recent preprint [Mac23b].

3.2. Groups generated by parabolic elements. For the remainder of
this section, we discuss applications of rigidity of irreducible groups in
semisimple Lie groups to problems that do not seemingly involve irreducible
groups or commensurators. To state this problem, we let q ∈ C be a param-
eter, and we let ∆q be the group generated by
                                               
                            1 0               1 q
                     a=           ,    bq =         .
                            1 1               0 1
The algebraic structure of ∆q , especially whether it is free or not, has been
the subject of much work, starting with Sanov’s 1947 theorem that ∆4 is
free [San47], and Brenner’s theorem that ∆q is free and discrete if |q| > 4
[Bre55], which implies ∆q is free for transcendental values of q. Freeness
of ∆q for nonzero rational values of q in (−4, 4) is a long-standing open
problem first mentioned by Brenner and Hirsch. The question was really
first studied in the work of Lyndon-Ullman, and later a negative answer has
been conjectured by Kim-Koberda:
Conjecture 3.9 (Lyndon-Ullman, Kim-Koberda [LU69, KK22]). For
nonzero rational values of q in (−4, 4), the group ∆q is not free.
   Kim-Koberda have proved this for numerators up to 24. Further ex-
perimental results are obtained by Detinko-Flannery-Hulpke [DFH22]. For
|q| < 4 (not necessarily rational), Knapp has proved that ∆q is discrete if
and only if 1−q/2 = cos((n−2)π/n) for some integer n ≥ 3 [Kna69]. Indeed,
note that the element ab−1q has trace |2 − q| < 2, hence it is elliptic. When q
is a rational non-integer, this must be an elliptic of infinite order. The case
that ∆q is discrete has been further studied by Agol, showing in particular
that ∆2 and ∆3 are not free, see [AOP+ 20]. Knapp’s theorem immediately
implies ∆q is indiscrete for nonintegral rational values with |q| < 4. A com-
plete description of ∆q up to finite index, and in particular a positive answer
to the above conjecture, follows from Greenberg-Shalom’s problem:
Theorem 3.10. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1. Then for
every non-integral rational q = r/s ∈ (−4, 4), the group ∆q has finite index
in SL(2, Z[1/s]). In particular, Conjecture 3.9 is true.
In this context it is particularly worth mentioning that the work of Detinko-
Flannery-Hulpke [DFH22] proves that for certain values of q, ∆q is finite
index in SL(2, Z[1/s]), see [DFH22, Table 1]. There are currently no known
values of q for which the (conditional) conclusion of Theorem 3.10 fails to
hold.
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            10

Proof. If q = r/s is written in lowest terms
                                           Q and is not integral, then ∆q is
a discrete subgroup of G := SL(2, R) × p|s SL(2, Qp ). Let T be a minimal
subset of factors such that ∆q has discrete projection to GT . Note that
T consists of at least two factors: The projection of ∆q to SL(2, R) is not
discrete by the above-mentioned work of Knapp [Kna69], and its projec-
tion to SL(2, Qp ) is not discrete because a ∈ SL(2, Zp ) has infinite order.
Further the projections are Zariski dense since their Zariski closures can-
not be solvable, and SL(2, R) and SL(2, Qp ) do not contain proper Zariski
closed non-solvable subgroups. Therefore prT (∆q ) ⊆ GT is irreducible, and
by Proposition 3.1, prT (∆q ) is a lattice in GT . Note Q    that T must con-
tain ∞, because a generates an indiscrete subgroup of p|s SL(2, Qp ). So
∆q ⊆ SL(2, Z[1/s]) is T -arithmetic, and is therefore commensurable with
SL(2, Z[1/t]), where t denotes the product of the finite primes in T .
   To see that t = s, it suffices to show that ∆q has unbounded projection
to SL(2, Qp ) for all p | s. Indeed, ab has trace 2 − q = 2 − r/s, and is
therefore not elliptic in SL(2, Qp ). In particular, ab generates an unbounded
subgroup.                                                                    □

   In fact, this strategy can handle not just rational, but all algebraic values
of q:

Theorem 3.11. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1. Let q ∈ Q
be an algebraic number that is not an algebraic integer, and let ∆q denote
the corresponding Lyndon-Ullman group.
   Then ∆q is free if and only if there is a Galois automorphism σ ∈
Gal(Q̄/Q) such that ∆σ(q) is free and discrete.

Proof of Theorem 3.11. We first note that for any Galois automorphism σ ∈
Gal(Q̄/Q), ∆σ(q) is free if and only if ∆q is free. Hence, assume that for any
Galois automorphism σ ∈ Gal(Q̄/Q), ∆σ(q) is indiscrete. We want to show
that ∆q is not free.
   The proof is similar to the previous one. Let k = Q(q). Since q ∈       / Ok ,
there exists a valuation ν of k such that |q|ν > 1. Let p be the prime such
that kν is a finite extension of Qp and consider ∆q ⊆ PSL(2, kν ). Note that
∆q is not discrete since a ∈ ∆q ∩ PSL(2, Oν ) has infinite order. Therefore
to show ∆q is almost-dense in a semisimple p-adic Lie group, it suffices to
show its Qp -Zariski closure is semisimple. To see this, it suffices to show the
Lie algebra gq of the Qp -Zariski closure of ∆q is semisimple.
   Note that ∆q is kν -Zariski dense in PSL(2, kν ) because it is not virtually
solvable. This implies the kν -span of gq is all of sl(2, kν ) (because it is a
∆q -invariant Lie subalgebra), and therefore gq must itself be semisimple:
The kν -span of its solvable radical would be an ideal in the kν -span of gq .
   By assumption, for any Galois automorphism σ ∈ Gal(Q̄/Q) ∆σ(q) is
indiscrete. Hence, by the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis, ∆q is an arithmetic
lattice in a semisimple p-adic Lie group H. Note that H has at least two
11                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

factors because ∆q is not discrete in its Qp -Zariski closure inside PSL(2, kν ).
In particular, ∆q is a higher rank arithmetic lattice and hence not free. □
3.3. Arithmetic of hyperbolic 3-manifolds. In this section we let G =
PO(3, 1) = Isom(H3 ) and discuss an application to hyperbolic 3-manifolds,
i.e. to manifolds of the form K\G/Λ where Λ is a lattice. It follows from
[MR03, Corollary 3.2.4] that there is a number field k such that Λ < G(k)
(after conjugation by an element of G if necessary). More generally, by work
of Selberg, Calabi, Raghunathan, and Garland [Sel60, Cal61, Rag67, Gar66]
for G a rank one Lie group, not locally isomorphic to SL(2, R), the same
statement continues to hold for lattices in G. Unless G is of the form SO(n, 1)
stronger statements are known. In higher rank Margulis famously showed all
lattices are arithmetic, a conclusion confirmed also for lattices in Sp(n, 1)
and F4−20 by Corlette and Gromov-Schoen [Mar75, Cor92, GS92]. Very
recently, Esnault-Groechenig have shown that all lattices in SU(n, 1) are in
fact conjugate into the integer points of some number field [EG18]. For an
account of why the results of that paper imply the desired result the reader
can see [BFMS23, Theorem 1.(3)] or [BU23, Theorem 4.3].
   It is a natural and reasonably well-known question to ask whether Λ
necessarily contains any integral matrices when G = SO(n, 1). We let Ok
denote the ring of k-integers.
   For completeness, we first furnish a proof of the following known state-
ment for non-uniform lattices. We thank Alan Reid for drawing this fact and
its proof to our attention. We give a statement for non-uniform lattices in
all rank one Lie groups, even though except in the case of SO(n, 1), stronger
results are discussed above.
   For G a rank one Lie group not locally isomorphic to SL(2, R), any lattice
Λ < G is conjugate into G(k) for some number field k as noted above. We
assume below that k is a minimal extension of Q.
Theorem 3.12. Let G be a rank one Lie group not locally isomorphic to
SL(2, R) and Λ < G a non-uniform lattice. Let k be as above, and Ok its ring
of integers. Then the subgroup Γ := Λ ∩ G(Ok ) is infinite, commensurated
by Λ, and Zariski dense in G(k).
Proof. Since Λ is finitely generated, the set of places S of k such that there
exists a matrix entry of a generator of Λ with negative valuation is finite.
It follows immediately that Λ commensurates Γ. Since the commensurator
of Γ is Zariski dense, as soon as Γ is infinite, Γ itself is Zariski dense (see
Lemma A.7 and Remark A.9).
   It thus suffices to show that Γ is infinite. By results of Garland-
Raghunathan [GR70], we know that for some choice of parabolic P , Γ in-
tersects the unipotent radical U of P in a lattice. Therefore Γ ∩ Z(U ) is
also non-trivial where Z(U ) is the center of U . If γ ∈ Z(U )(k) then it is
elementary that for some n, we have γ n ∈ Z(U )(Ok ) since on the center
of a unipotent group, multiplication is just addition of matrix coefficients.
Hence, Γ is infinite.                                                        □
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                           12

  As an application of our methods, we prove the following more general,
but conditional statement that holds when Λ is uniform and G = SO(3, 1):
Theorem 3.13. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1. For any
finite volume hyperbolic 3-manifold M = H3 /Λ and k, Ok as above, the
subgroup Γ := Λ ∩ G(Ok ) is infinite, commensurated by Λ, and Zariski dense
in G(k).
Proof. As discussed above, along with the number field k, there exists an
algebraic group G defined over k such that Λ ⊆ G(k). Here Λ is a lattice
in G(R) = PO(3, 1), so G is a form of PO(4)(C). As in the proof of Theo-
rem 3.12, the set of places S of k such that there exists a matrix entry of a
generator of Λ with valuation > 1, is finite. It follows immediately that Λ
commensurates Γ. It remains to prove that Γ is infinite.
   At any place s ∈ / S, we have Λ ⊆ G(Os ). In particular, if S = ∅, then
Γ = Λ and we are done. Now assume S ̸= ∅. If Λ ⊆ GS is indiscrete, then
Γ = Λ ∩ G(OS ) is infinite and we are done.
   Henceforth assume that Λ ⊆ GS is discrete. Since PO(4) is of type D2 and
any split group of Q type D2 is a product of groups of type A1 (cf. [Bur16]),
the group
       Q    G S  :=    s∈S G(ks ) splits as a product of rank one factors, say
GS = i∈I Gi . Choose a minimal subset J ⊆ I (possibly J = I) such that
prJ (Λ) ⊆ GJ is discrete. We note that J consists of at least two factors.
Indeed, since each Gi has rank 1, its Bruhat-Tits building is a tree, and since
Λ is not virtually free, it cannot act properly discontinuously on a bounded
degree tree.
   Since Λ ⊆ G(k), its R-Zariski closure in G(R) is defined over k (see e.g.
[Zim84, Proposition 3.1.8]). Since Λ ⊆ G(R) is a lattice, it is R-Zariski dense
in G(R). Combining these two observations, we see that Λ is k-Zariski dense
in G(k). Restricting scalars from k to Q, we conclude that Λ is Q-Zariski
dense in (Rk/Q G)(Q).
   Let Jp ⊂ J denote the indices corresponding to the p-adic factors of GJ
and GJp denote the product of the p-adic factors of GJ . Then, by restriction
of scalars as in the discussion following Definition 2.6, GJp is a Qp -algebraic
group.
   We claim that Λ is irreducible in GJ . By minimality of J, the projection
of Λ to any proper subset of factors is indiscrete, so it remains to show that
Λ is Zariski dense in GJp (Qp ) for every prime p.
   Now write Sp for the set of p-adic places of S. We have
                             Y             Y
                    GS p =       G(ks ) =     (Rk/Q G)(Qp ).
                           s∈Sp          s∈Sp

We regard GSp as a Qp -algebraic group using the product structure given
by the right-hand side. Since the diagonal embedding
                                      Y
                           Rk/Q G ,→     Rk/Q G
                                       s∈Sp
13                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

is defined over QQ and Λ is Q-Zariski dense in (Rk/Q G)(Q), the Q-Zariski
closure of Λ in s∈Sp (Rk/Q G)(Q) is exactly the diagonal. So the Qp -Zariski
closure of Λ in GSp contains the diagonally embedded copy G(k). However,
since G is adjoint, it satisfies weak approximation, so G(k) is (analytically)
dense in GSp [San81, Corollary 5.8]. Hence the Qp -Zariski closure of Λ in GSp
(which is of course analytically closed) contains a dense set and therefore
must be all of GSp . This shows that Λ is Qp -Zariski dense in GSp .
   Since every factor of GSp is defined over Qp , the projection GSp → GJp is
also defined over Qp . It follows that the image of Λ in GJp is also Qp -Zariski
dense.                                                                        □

                               4. Coherence
   The main result of this section is Theorem 4.2, deducing coherence of
certain S−arithmetic lattices from the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1.
Recall the following definition of coherent groups:
Definition 4.1. A finitely presented group Γ is coherent if any finitely
generated subgroup of Γ is finitely presented.
   Free groups and surface groups are coherent, as are abelian and, more
generally, polycyclic groups. Scott has shown 3-manifold groups are coher-
ent [Sco73], and since then, coherence has emerged as one of their salient
properties. On the other hand, F2 ×F2 is incoherent. This was first observed
by Baumslag, Boone, and Neumann in [BBN59] and this line of inquiry was
developed by Stallings [Sta63], cf. [Wis20, Section 9.d]. Baumslag-Roseblade
proved that a subgroup of F2 × F2 is finitely presented if and only if it is a
finite extension of a finite product of finite rank free groups, and that there
are many finitely generated subgroups that are not of this form [BR84].
   See [Wis20] for a survey of coherent groups, as well as many open prob-
lems. The class of coherent groups is not well-understood: For example,
Serre famously asked whether SL(2, Z[1/p]) is coherent [Ser74]. Below we
give a positive answer assuming the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. Note
however that SL(4, Z) is incoherent as it contains the incoherent group
F2 × F2 . Serre also asked if SL(3, Z) is coherent, and this also remains
open.
   The relevance of the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis to coherence of lat-
tices is that by Proposition 3.1, irreducible lattices in products do not have
many subgroups; more precisely either a subgroup is not irreducible or it
is also a lattice and therefore has finite index. In the following case, we
have sufficient control over reducible groups that we can conclude they are
finitely presented:
Theorem 4.2. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1. Let S be a
(nonempty) finite set of places of Q and either assume all places are finite
or that there are two places, one infinite and one finite, in S. Set Gs :=
PGL(2, Qs ) and G := GS . Then any S-arithmetic lattice Λ ⊆ G is coherent.
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            14

Proof. Let Γ ⊆ Λ be a finitely generated infinite subgroup. Let H denote
the Q-Zariski closure of Γ. If H is a proper subgroup then it must fix some
point on G/P since it cannot fix a proper factor. Hence, it is solvable. In
the case when we have one real and one finite place, this implies that Γ is
either virtually abelian or virtually contained in a Baumslag-Solitar group
BS(1, p). In the case where there are no real places, H solvable implies H
abelian, since all solvable subgroups of the lattice are virtually abelian. In
all cases, Γ is finitely presented and we are done. So we can assume Γ is
Q-Zariski dense and so all projections are Zariski dense.
   Choose a minimal subset T ⊆ S (possibly T = S) such that prT (Γ) ⊆ GT
is discrete. Then prT (Γ) is irreducible in GT . If |T | ≥ 2, then by Proposition
3.1, Γ is an irreducible lattice in GT and hence is finitely presented, and the
proof is complete.
   It remains to consider the case that Γ projects discretely to a factor Gt ,
which is either PGL(2, R) or PGL(2, Qp ). In either case, all discrete, finitely
generated subgroups are finitely presented: In PGL(2, R), any such subgroup
is a surface group or is virtually free. In PGL(2, Qp ), every such group is
virtually free.                                                                 □

Remark 4.3. It is clear from the proof that something more general can
be proven by the same argument. For example, we can consider number
fields other than Q if we assume all places are finite, as in this case, lattices
are cocompact and solvable subgroups of Λ are abelian. A similar argument
might work for (some) other number fields if we allow one infinite place and
one finite place, provided the solvable subgroups of Λ are coherent. Thus,
the restrictions really stem from the fact that it is known that SL(2, Z[1/n])
is not coherent if n is composite [Ser74]. It also clearly follows from the
Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis that all finitely generated Zariski dense sub-
groups of SL(2, Q) are finitely presented.

  This also has implications for a fundamental question about coherence, to
our knowledge first explicitly posed by Wise [Wis20, Problem 9.16], namely
whether coherence is a geometric (i.e. quasi-isometry invariant) property?
We note that Wise already explicitly hedges against this.

Corollary 4.4. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. Then coherence
is not a quasi-isometry invariant.

Proof. Let p, q be distinct primes and consider lattices in G := PGL(2, Qp )×
PGL(2, Qq ). All such lattices are cocompact and hence quasi-isometric. By
Theorem 4.2, the irreducible lattices in G are coherent. On the other hand,
any lattice in PGL(2, Qp ) or PGL(2, Qq ) is virtually free (of rank > 1),
so G admits reducible lattices that are products Fm × Fn of free groups
(with m, n > 1). These are incoherent by the previously mentioned result
of Baumslag-Roseblade [BR84].                                               □
15                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

                    5. Margulis-Zimmer conjecture
   A major motivation for Greenberg-Shalom’s question is the following con-
jecture advertised by Margulis-Zimmer in the late ‘70s, seeking to classify
commensurated subgroups of higher rank lattices Λ. Here we say Γ ⊆ Λ is
commensurated if Λ ⊆ CommG (Γ). The main result of this section is The-
orem 5.3, deducing the Margulis-Zimmer Conjecture 5.1 below for certain
S−arithmetic lattices from the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1.
Conjecture 5.1 (Margulis-Zimmer, see [SW13]). Let G be a semisimple
algebraic group defined over a number field k and S a finite set of valuations
of k. Assume G has higher S-rank. Assume Λ = G(OS ) is an S-arithmetic
lattice in G, then any commensurated subgroup of Λ is either finite or S ′ -
arithmetic for some S ′ ⊆ S.
  Here, the S-rank of G is the sum of the kν -ranks over all valuations ν ∈ S,
and G is said to have higher S-rank if its S-rank is at least 2.
Remark 5.2.
(1) For example, if Γ is a commensurated subgroup of SL(n, Z[1/p]) (where
    n ≥ 2), then Γ is predicted to be either finite, finite-index, or commen-
    surable to SL(n, Z).
(2) Conjecture 5.1 is motivated by and strengthens Margulis’ Normal Sub-
    group Theorem.
(3) Question 1.1 and Conjecture 5.1 are closely related: For example, if
    Γ ⊆ G(OS ) is a commensurated subgroup and Γ∩G(O) is infinite, then a
    positive answer to Question 1.1 proves Γ intersects G(O) in a lattice. S ′ -
    arithmeticity of Γ then follows from Venkataramana’s result (see [LZ01,
    Proposition 2.3]) that the only intermediate subgroups between G(O)
    and G(OS ) are S ′ -arithmetic for some S ′ ⊆ S, which proves Conjecture
    5.1 for such groups.
   Using well-chosen unipotent generating sets, Venkataramana has proven
the Margulis-Zimmer Conjecture for arithmetic lattices Γ = G(Z) in sim-
ple groups defined over Q [Ven87]. Shalom-Willis have proved Conjecture
5.1 in more instances, including the first that are not simple [SW13]. Their
proof crucially relies on fine arithmetic properties for lattices in these groups,
namely bounded generation by unipotents. As it is now known that bounded
generation is not a common property for higher rank lattices [CRRZ22], dif-
ferent approaches are needed. The results in [FMvL24] yield partial results
on this conjecture and the first that do not depend on unipotent elements,
see Corollary 1.5 in that paper. This summarizes all prior work on Conjec-
ture 5.1.
   We now deduce a special case of Conjecture 5.1 assuming the Greenberg-
Shalom hypothesis. Namely we deduce the case where G has at least two
factors, at least one of which is non-archimedean. The deduction of this case
of the Margulis-Zimmer conjecture from the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                          16

is quite simple modulo arguments we have already made. The existence of
at least two factors is essential to the argument, but the requirement of a
non-archimedean one can be removed if the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis
is strengthened to cover approximate groups (see Question 3.8), but we do
not pursue Q this here.                                            P
   Let G = I Gi be as in 2.1. We denote the rank of G by rk(G) = i∈I ki -
rk(Gi (ki )) and assume that rk(G) ≥ 2. Let Gna denote the product of
Gi ’s over all non-archimedean factors. We establish the following case of
Conjecture 5.1.
Theorem 5.3. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis and suppose Gna
is non-trivial and |I| ≥ 2. Let Λ denote an irreducible lattice in G, and
Γ ⊂ Λ be an infinite subgroup commensurated by Λ. Then there exists J ⊂ I
such that prJ (Γ) (isomorphic to Γ under prJ ) is a lattice in GJ .
Proof. If Γ is irreducible, it is a lattice by Proposition 3.1.
   Assume therefore that Γ is reducible. Hence there exists a minimal subset
J ⊊ I such that prJ (Γ) is discrete. Irreducibility of Λ implies that prJ (Λ)
is dense in GJ . Note also that prJ is injective on Λ, and hence on Γ. Thus,
prJ (Γ) ⊂ GJ is an infinite discrete subgroup commensurated by prJ (Λ),
where the latter is almost dense. Then the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis
implies that prJ (Γ) ⊂ prJ (G) is a lattice.                               □
   One might want to reverse this implication, but it is not immediate. If
one assumes that Γ < G as in Greenberg-Shalom’s Question 1.1 is contained
in an arithmetic lattice G(O) ⊆ G (where O is the ring of integers of a
number field k), then it follows from an old argument of Borel that the
commensurator Λ := CommG (Γ) is contained in G(k) see [Bor66] or [Zim84,
Prop. 6.2.2]. (In [Zim84, Prop. 6.2.2] this is stated for arithmetic lattices,
but the only property used is that Γ is a Zariski dense subgroup of an
arithmetic lattice). Then Λ contains finitely generated subgroups that are
dense in G and contained in S-arithmetic lattices G(OS ), where S is a finite
set of places of k. It is, however, not at all clear in general how to force Λ
to contain an S-arithmetic lattice without already proving Γ is a lattice. In
this sense, the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis is a strengthening of a special
case of the Margulis-Zimmer conjecture.

                  6. Automorphism groups of trees
   Going beyond semisimple Lie groups, one can study discrete irreducible
subgroups of automorphism groups of products of trees. Their irreducible
lattices are known to exhibit rigidity by the work of Burger-Mozes [BM00a,
BM00b]. In this setting we have the following questions due to Fisher-
Larsen-Spatzier-Stover:
Question 6.1 (Fisher-Larsen-Spatzier-Stover [FLSS18]). Let Γ be a surface
group of genus g ≥ 2.
(1) Does there exist ρ : Γ → Aut(T1 × · · · × Tk ) with discrete image?
17                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

(2) Does there exist ρ as in (1) where ρ takes values in a product G1 ×
    · · · × Gk where each Gi is a rank one simple algebraic group over a
    non-archimedean local field?
(3) Can Γ be faithfully represented into PGL(2, K) for some global field K
    of positive characteristic?

If there is an action as in (1), then on a subgroup of finite index, ρ is
the diagonal embedding from homomorphisms ρi : Γ → Aut(Ti ). Question
6.1(2) is only implicit in [FLSS18]. In [FLSS18], it is shown a positive
answer to the third question gives a positive answer to the first and second.
Questions 6.1(1) and (2) are clearly related to Corollary 3.2. We remark
here that a negative answer to the analogue of Greenberg-Shalom’s question
for automorphism groups of trees is given by Burger and Mozes in [BM96,
Proposition 8.1], and that one can also construct irreducible subgroups in
products of trees as done by e.g. the third author and Huang in [HM23].
However, Question 6.1(1) is still open as is the corresponding question for
finitely generated free groups.
   In this section we shall first prove an improvement of [FLSS18, Theorem
15] and use it to prove Corollary 3.2 and from that Corollary 3.3. The
improvement is minor and the main ideas are present in [FLSS18] but we
need a stronger statement than given there and expect it to be needed in
other applications. For the purposes of this section, we shall use the following
terminology. Let T denote a tree, and ∂T its Gromov boundary. Then any
p ∈ ∂T will be referred to as a point at infinity of T .

6.1. On a theorem from [FLSS18].
Theorem 6.2. Suppose that Λ is a torsion free hyperbolic group that is not
free. Let
                              X = T1 × · · · × Tn
                                                                      Q
be a product of finite-valence trees, set Gi := Aut(Ti ), and G := Gi . Let
pri denote the projection of G onto Gi . If ρ : Λ → G is a discrete and faithful
representation, then there are at least two values of i such that ρi := pri ◦ρ is
faithful and has indiscrete image. Moreover, suppose ρ1 , . . . , ρr are faithful
representations and the other ρi are not. Then the representation
                      ρ1 × · · · × ρr : Λ → G1 × · · · × Gr
is discrete and faithful. If we further assume ρ1 × · · · × ρr is minimal for the
property of having discrete image, then for all i, ρi (Λ) does not fix a point
at infinity on Ti .
Proof. The only new statement is the last one concerning no fixed points
at infinity. Assume the action on one tree T1 fixes a point at infinity, that
all ρi are faithful, that r > 1 and that (ρ2 × · · · × ρr )(Λ) is not discrete. If
we fix a point η at infinity on T1 , we have a height, or Busemann, function
                    the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                                 18

bη : T1 → Z. It is easy and standard that if ρ1 (Λ) fixes η and x0 ∈ T1 is
chosen such that bη (x0 ) = 0, then the map
                                 Bη :Λ −→ Z
                                     λ 7−→ bη (λx0 )
is a homomorphism.
   Let K = ker(Bη ). Observe that since G1 has no parabolic elements, any
λ ∈ K fixes a point in T1 . Now fix a vertex v in T2 × · · · × Tr and let ∆ be
the stabilizer of v in Λ under the action defined by ρ2 × · · · × ρr . Note ∆ is
non-trivial by hypothesis.
   It suffices to show that K ∩∆ is nonempty and this is done almost exactly
as in [FLSS18]. Consider x ∈ K and y ∈ ∆. As K is normal in Λ, the
commutators [x, y n ] = x(y n x−n y −n ) belong to K for any n ∈ Z. It suffices
to find values of n such that the commutator also belongs to ∆. As in
[FLSS18], we see that since y fixes v, the points y n x−1 y −n · v = y n x−1 · v
all lie in a ball centered at v of radius d(v, x−1 · v). Since all trees are
finite valence, this ball is a finite set and so there are n1 ̸= n2 ∈ Z such that
y n1 x−1 ·v = y n2 x−1 ·v this implies xy n1 −n2 x−1 v = v, so that [x, y n1 −n2 ] ∈ ∆.
This contradicts discreteness of (ρ1 × · · · × ρr )(Λ).                              □
6.2. Proof of Corollaries 3.2 and 3.3. With Theorem 6.2 in place,
we are finally in a position to prove Corollary 3.2, whose proof we had
postponed.
Proof of Corollary 3.2: The first statement follows e.g. from the fact that
a surface group Λ can only be a lattice in a semisimple algebraic group if
the group is locally isomorphic to PSL(2, R) and that a finitely generated
free group Fk is only a lattice in a simple algebraic group of rank one over
a non-archimedean field or a group locally isomorphic to PSL(2, R).Q
   For the second point, we have a surface group Λ < G where G = i∈I Gi
where each Gi is a rank one pi -adic group whose Bruhat-Tits building is
a tree. After some initial reductions, we will argue that Λ is irreducible.
First, by Theorem 6.2 (or [FLSS18, Theorem 15]), there is a subset J ⊂ I
such that theQprojection of Λ to each Gj is faithful and indiscrete where
Λ < GJ = j∈J Gj is discrete and |J| ≥ 2. We fix a subset J that is
minimal with respect to these properties.
   For j ∈ J, the Qpj -Zariski closure of the projection of Λ to Gj is simple.
Otherwise it would, up to finite index, fix a point at infinity, but Theorem 6.2
shows that the projection of finite index subgroups of Λ to each Gj do not
fix a point at infinity.
   We now replace every Gj by the Qpj -Zariski closure of the projection of
Λ, and argue that Λ ⊆ GJ is irreducible. Henceforth we will regard Gj
as a Qpj -algebraic group, and omit the field when referring to its Zariski
topology.
   Recall that for each prime p, theQcollection of p-adic factors of GJ is
indexed by Jp , and we write Gp := j∈Jp Gj for the product of the p-adic
19                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

factors of GJ . By minimality of J, for every J ′ ⊊ J, the projection of Λ to
GJ ′ is indiscrete.
   Therefore it remains to show that for every prime p, the projection of Λ
to Gp is Zariski dense. Let Hp be the Zariski closure of the projection of Λ,
and let Jp′ ⊆ Jp be those values of j such that Gj ⊆ Hp . We will argue by
contradiction that Jp′ = Jp , and this will complete the proof.
   Suppose therefore that Jp′ is a proper subset of Jp . Let Hp = Hp /GJp′ .
Consider now the image of Hp in the product of the remaining factors
GJp /GJp′ . Since for every j ∈ Jp , the projection of Λ to Gj is Zariski dense,
the image of Hp surjects onto (but does not contain) Gj for j ∈ Jp \Jp′ . In
particular, GJp /GJp′ consists of at least two factors.
   Fix one such factor Gj0 . Since the kernel of the projection of Hp to Gj0
would be normal in the remaining factors, it is a product of some subset of
them. But since Hp does not contain any factors of GJp /GJp′ , we conclude
that Hp projects isomorphically onto Gj0 .
   Therefore the projection
                Hp × GJp′ × GJ /GJp → Gj0 × GJp′ × GJ /GJp
that replaces Hp by Gj0 is a topological isomorphism. Since (the projection
of) Λ is discrete in the former, it is also discrete in the latter. However,
since Jp \Jp′ consists of at least two factors, this contradicts minimality of J.
                                                                               □
   With Corollary 3.2 in place, we now complete the proof of Corollary 3.3.
Note first that since Λ is a surface group, it is torsion-free. Hence so is Γ.
In particular, Γ cannot be a non-trivial finite group.
Proof of Corollary 3.3: As Λ is finitely generated, there are at most finitely
many finite places S of k such that there is an element of ΛQof norm greater
than one in the valuation. Viewing Λ as a subgroup of G := s∈S PSL(2, ks ),
we see that Γ is the intersection of Λ with a compact open subgroup in G.
It follows immediately that Λ commensurates Γ and that if Γ is infinite, it is
Zariski dense (by Lemma A.7 and minimality of k). So it remains to show
Γ is infinite. Corollary 3.2 implies that Λ is not discrete in G and so Γ is
infinite.                                                                   □
Remark 6.3. Note that in the above proof, we allow for the possibility that
the image of Λ is bounded. In this case, Γ is of finite index in Λ. Indeed, if
Λ itself is arithmetic, this is exactly what the above proof furnishes. In this
case, Γ is also arithmetic.
Remark 6.4. For each of the places s, there is a compact open subgroup
Qs ⊂ PSL(2, ks ). Also, if prs denotes the projection of G onto PSL(2, ks ),
let Γs = Λ ∩ pr−1
               s (Qs ). Then Γ = ∩s Γs . The subgroup Γs detects density at
s. What the proof of Corollary 3.3 in fact shows is that Γ detects density
simultaneously at all s.
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                           20

            7. Rank gradient and small generating sets
   For a finitely generated group Γ, the rank rk(Γ) is the minimal number
of generators in a generating set for Γ. It is interesting to consider ranks of
finite index subgroups of Γ. Writing Γ as a quotient of a free group Fr of
rank r := rk(Γ), the pre-image of a finite index subgroup Θ ⊆ Γ in Fr is a
free subgroup of index [Γ : Θ], and therefore has rank [Γ : Θ](rk(Γ) − 1) + 1.
In particular,
(7.1)                  rk(Θ) − 1 ≤ (rk(Γ) − 1)[Γ : Θ],
so rk(Θ) − 1 grows at most linearly in [Γ : Θ]. Given a chain of finite index
subgroups
                        Γ = Γ0 ⊇ Γ1 ⊇ Γ2 ⊇ . . . ,
the rank gradient of Γ with respect to the chain (Γn )n is
                                          rk(Γn ) − 1
                      rg(Γ, (Γn )n ) := lim           .
                                       n→∞ [Γ : Γn ]

   In the context of lattices in semisimple Lie groups it seems possible that
all statements about rank gradient are actually consequences of a stronger
property.
Definition 7.1. We say Γ has arbitrarily small k generated finite index
subgroups if given any finite index subgroup Γ′ < Γ there is a further finite
index subgroup Γ′′ that has a k element generating set.
   In this section we explain some history of the notions mentioned above,
some results on them and their connections to both the Greenberg-Shalom
hypothesis and one another.
   The main theorem of this section is Theorem 7.3, which asserts that
assuming
Q          the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis, the following holds. For G =
  i G i a product  of r ≥ 2 factors as in Standing assumptions 2.1, and Gi
corresponding to different places pi of Q, (pi ≤ ∞), any irreducible lattice
Γ ⊆ G contains arbitrarily small r-generated finite index subgroups.

7.1. Historical remarks and motivation. Lackenby introduced rank
gradient as a generalization of Heegaard gradient, which is an invariant for
3-manifolds [Lac05]. Abert-Nikolov proved that if the chain (Γn )n is Farber
(e.g. if Γn are contained in a chain of normal subgroups of Γ that has trivial
intersection), then the rank gradient computes the cost of the action of Γ on
the boundary of the coset tree associated to the chain, i.e. the profinite space
lim Γ/Γn [AN12]. Cost is more generally defined for probability measure-
←−
preserving Borel actions of Γ, and the fixed price problem asks whether the
cost of an action only depends on Γ and not on the action itself. A posi-
tive answer for many groups, including higher rank nonuniform irreducible
lattices in real Lie groups has been given by Gaboriau [Gab00]. Abert-
Gelander-Nikolov have given a positive answer for right-angled lattices in
21                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

such Lie groups, which includes the first uniform examples [AGN17]. (Re-
call [AGN17] that a group Γ is right-angled if it admits a finite generating
set {γ1 , · · · , γn } such that each γi is non-torsion, and γi , γi+1 commute for
i = 1, · · · , n − 1.) Recently, Fraczyk-Mellick-Wilkens have positively an-
swered the question for all lattices in higher rank real Lie groups [FMW23].
In all of these results, the cost is 1, which implies vanishing of the rank
gradient for any Farber sequence. Some further results relevant here are
contained in an even more recent preprint of Mellick [Mel23]. It is possible
that the strongest results on rank gradient that one can obtain conditionally
on the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis will soon be known by other methods.
   However in the context of lattices in semisimple Lie groups, oftentimes
one can find many finite index subgroups with a uniformly bounded number
of generators. This is not the case for lattices in SL(2, R), since those surject
onto free groups, and so do some lattices in other rank 1 groups. However,by
combining work of Raghunathan, Tits, and Venkataramana, one can prove
that for a nonuniform higher rank arithmetic lattice Γ in a Q-simple real Lie
group G, there exists k ≥ 2 such that Γ has arbitrarily small k-generated
finite index subgroups (see [SV05, Remark 3]). In particular, the cost of
Farber chains is always 1. Sarma-Venkataramana have shown that one can
take k = 3 [SV05]. Sarma has studied the same problem for S-arithmetic
lattices, and in particular has proven that for an S-arithmetic lattice in
SL(2, K), where K is a number field and |S| ≥ 2, one can take k = 3 [Sar06].
For SL(n, Z), n ≥ 3, Lubotzky has asked whether one can take k = 2,
i.e. whether SL(n, Z), n ≥ 3, has “arbitrarily small 2-generator finite index
subgroups” [Lub86], and this was proven by Meiri [Mei17]. The analogue of
Lubotzky’s question is open for all other commensurability classes of higher
rank lattices, including S-arithmetic ones.

7.2. The Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis and rank. We start with the
following observation.

Remark 7.2. Suppose that the Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis 1.1 holds.
Then for N ≥ 2 and Γ =    Q SL(2, Z[1/N ]), the Lyndon-Ullman group ∆1/N
is a lattice in SL(2, R) × p|N SL(2, Qp ) (see Theorem 3.10). It is therefore
a finite index 2-generated subgroup of SL(2, Z[1/N ]). This shows that the
Greenberg-Shalom Hypothesis in at least some cases implies k = 2 even
when the number of places is greater than 2.

   Heuristically, under the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis, for irreducible lat-
tices Γ ⊆ G (where G consists of at least 2 factors) one should indeed have
k = 2, and in particular, the cost of Farber chains is always 1: namely, it
is plausible that a generic pair of elements generates an irreducible group,
which would have finite index by Proposition 3.1. The following result shows
that one can indeed make such an argument (with k given by the number
of factors):
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                         22
                                                                       Q
Theorem 7.3. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis. Let G = i Gi
be a product of r ≥ 2 factors as in Standing assumptions 2.1, and assume
Gi correspond to different places pi of Q, with pi ≤ ∞. Then any irreducible
lattice Γ ⊆ G contains arbitrarily small r-generated finite index subgroups.
Corollary 7.4. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis.                 Γ =
SL(n, Z[1/p]) contains arbitrarily small 2-generated finite index subgroups.
   To prove Theorem 7.3, we start with some preliminaries. First, we re-
call some facts about Jordan projections and loxodromic elements (see e.g.
[BQ16, Chapter 6]). For a connected simple algebraic group H over a local
field of characteristic 0, every nontrivial element admits a Jordan decom-
position g = ge gh gu as a product of a commuting triple consisting of an
elliptic element ge , a hyperbolic element gh , and a unipotent element gu .
An element g ∈ H is called loxodromic if gh is regular, i.e. conjugate into
exp a+ , where a+ is the (open) positive Weyl chamber. Any loxodromic
element g is semisimple, i.e. gu = e, and is therefore conjugate to an ele-
ment of the form m exp(X) where X ∈ a+ and m ∈ ZK (A) centralizes the
maximal torus A = exp a. If H is real, then for any Zariski dense subgroup
Θ ⊆ H, the set Θlox of loxodromic elements is also Zariski dense (and, in
particular, nonempty) in H (see e.g. [BQ16, Theorem 6.36]). If H is p-adic,
this is true under the additional assumption that every simple root of H
is unbounded on the set of Cartan projections of Θ (see [BQ16, Lemma
9.2]). These existence results will be useful to us because, by the following
lemma, a loxodromic element and a generic element generate a Zariski dense
subgroup.
Lemma 7.5. Let H be a connected simple algebraic group over a local field
of characteristic 0, and let h ∈ H be nontrivial. Assume that either
  (i) h is loxodromic, or
 (ii) H is nonarchimedean and h belongs to a compact, open, torsion-free
      subgroup that is contained in the image of the exponential map.
Then there exists a nonempty Zariski open (and in particular, open and
dense) set S ⊆ H such that for g ∈ S, the group ⟨g, h⟩ is Zariski dense in
H.
   We postpone the proof of Lemma 7.5 till after that of Theorem 7.3. Hence-
forth we will refer to the Qpi -Zariski topology on Gi simply as Q
                                                                 the Zariski
topology, and likewise for the product Zariski topology on G = i Gi .
   To find elements in the Zariski open sets given by the above lemma, we
need to establish Zariski density of suitable subsets of Γ. This is accom-
plished by the following lemma:
Lemma 7.6. Assume the notation of Theorem 7.3. Fix j ∈ I and let
U ⊆ G/Gj be an open neighborhood of identity. Denote by Γj ⊆ Γ the
subset consisting of elements γ ∈ Γ whose projection mod Gj lies in U .
  Then
23                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

  (i) prj (Γj ) is Zariski dense in Gj , and
 (ii) If Gj is p-adic for some p, then every simple root of Gj is unbounded
      on the Cartan projections of prj (Γj ).

  We also postpone the proof of Lemma 7.6 till after that of Theorem 7.3.
With these preliminary facts stated, we can start the proof of Theorem 7.3
proper:
Proof of Theorem 7.3. Index the factors by a set of primes and possibly ∞.
If there is no archimedean factor, relabel one of the finite primes (formally) to
be ∞. Then for p ̸= ∞, let Kp ⊆ Gp be a compact open subgroup      Q contained
in the image of the exponential map on Gp and set K := p̸=∞ Kp . For
any p, let qp : G → G/Gp ∼
                                     Q
                                  = ℓ̸=p Gℓ be the quotient mod Gp , and define
the subgroup ΓK := Γ ∩ q∞         −1 (K) consisting of those elements of Γ whose

projection mod G∞ lies in K. By Lemma 7.6, pr∞ (ΓK ) is Zariski dense in
G∞ , and hence contains a loxodromic element. Let a ∈ ΓK be such that
pr∞ (a) is loxodromic.
    We will now show that for every p ̸= ∞, there exists bp ∈ Γ such that
   (i) ⟨a, bp ⟩ is indiscrete mod Gp , and
  (ii) ⟨a, bp ⟩ has Zariski dense projections to G∞ and to Gp .
Assuming existence of such bp , it is easy to see ⟨a, bp | p ̸= ∞⟩ is irreducible in
G. Indeed, the projections mod Gp are indiscrete for p ̸= ∞ by Property (i).
The projection mod G∞ is indiscrete because q∞ (a) belongs to the compact
torsion-free subgroup K. Finally, projections to any factor are Zariski dense
by Property (ii).
    So it remains to establish existence of elements bp ∈ Γ with the above
Properties (i) and (ii). By Lemma 7.5 above, for every factor Gℓ (including
G∞ ) there exists an open dense set Sℓ ⊆ Gℓ such that for any gℓ ∈ Sℓ ,
Q group ⟨gQ
the              ℓ , prℓ (a)⟩ is Zariski dense in Gℓ . For every p ̸= ∞, Q  the set
   ℓ̸=p Sℓ ⊆        ℓ̸=p Gℓ is open and dense, so we can choose gp ∈         ℓ̸=p Sℓ
sufficiently close to identity so that iterated commutators of gp and qp (a)
converge to the identity in G/Gp . Since the subsets     Q Sℓ ⊆ Gℓ , ℓ ̸= p, are
open, there is an open neighborhood Vp of gp ∈ ℓ̸=p Gℓ such that these
properties hold for any element of Vp . To summarize, we have that for any
g ∈ Vp , the group ⟨g, qp (a)⟩ is indiscrete in G/Gp , and has Zariski dense
projection to Gℓ for all ℓ ̸= p.          Q
    Since Γ has dense projection to ℓ̸=p Gℓ , we can choose γp ∈ Γ such that
qp (γp ) ∈ Vp . Further choose Wp ∋ e an open neighborhood of the identity
in G/Gp such that qp (γp )Wp ⊆ Vp . Let Γp := Γ ∩ qp−1 (Wp ) consist of those
elements of Γ whose projection mod Gp lies in Wp .
    We now consider elements bp of the form γp ηp , where ηp ∈ Γp . For such
elements, the projection to G∞ lies in S∞ , so ⟨a, bp ⟩ has Zariski dense pro-
jection to G∞ . Further, iterated commutators of qp (bp ) and qp (a) converge
to the identity in G/Gp , and they cannot terminate since then ⟨a, bp ⟩ would
be nilpotent and in particular not Zariski dense in G∞ . This establishes
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            24

both claimed Properties (i) and (ii) of bp except the Zariski density of the
projection to Gp , so we will now show we can choose bp to guarantee this as
well.
   This last property exactly means that we require prp (bp ) ∈ Sp . On the
other hand, the possible choices of prp (bp ) are among prp (γp ) prp (Wp ). This
latter set is Zariski dense by Lemma 7.6 (applied with U = Wp ), and since
Sp is nonempty and Zariski open, we have Sp ∩ prp (γp ) prp (Wp ) ̸= ∅, so that
there exists a satisfactory choice of bp .                                     □
  Corollary 7.4 immediately follows from the proof of Theorem 7.3 above.


7.3. Proofs of Lemma 7.5 and Lemma 7.6. We now furnish the post-
poned proofs of Lemma 7.5 and Lemma 7.6.
Proof of Lemma 7.5: The idea is to consider the set of elements g such that
Ad(g) and Ad(h) have no joint invariant subspace in the Lie algebra h of
                                                              Z
H. Then for such g, as long as the Lie algebra of ⟨g, h⟩ is nontrivial, it
must be all of h, and this will imply ⟨g, h⟩ is Zariski dense. However, we will
actually work with a smaller set of g that we can prove is Zariski open.
    To define this set, for g ∈ H and 0 < d < dim h, let Ig (d) denote the
collection of d-dimensional Ad(g)-invariant subspaces of h, and let Ig :=
∪d Ig (d) denote the collection of all proper Ad(g)-invariant subspaces of h.
Note that Ig (d) is a Zariski closed subset of the Grassmannian Grd (h). Let
Sd be the set of all elements g ∈ H such that Ad(g)Ih (d) ∩ Ih (d) = ∅,
so the complement of Sd consists of those g ∈ H such that there exists
x ∈ Ih (d) with gx ∈ Ih (d). Note also that, as promised, we indeed have
Ig (d) ∩ Ih (d) = ∅ for all g ∈ Sd .
    Let
                        πH : H × Grd (h) × Grd (h) → H
be the projection onto the first factor. In terms of this map, we have
       Sdc = πH ({(g, x, gx) ∈ H × Grd (h) × Grd (h) | x, gx ∈ Ih (d)}).
Let α : H × Grd (h) → Grd (h) denote the action map α(g, x) := gx. Then
we have
                  Sdc = πH (Graph(α) ∩ (H × Id (h) × Id (h))).
Using this description, we will show that Sdc is Zariski closed. A projection
X ×Y → X of varieties is a closed map (with respect to the Zariski topology
on X × Y ) if Y is a projective variety, so πH is a closed map. Of course
H × Id (h) × Id (h) is Zariski closed, so it remains to show Graph(α) is Zariski
closed. This is a special case of the general fact that the graph of a surjective
algebraic map F : X → Y to a projective variety Y is Zariski closed in X ×Y .
We have shown Sd is Zariski open, and therefore so is S = ∩d Sd .
   Next, we show that S ̸= ∅. For this, we use the following property of h
that holds under the assumption that either h is loxodromic or sufficiently
close to identity: there exists X ∈ h such that Ih is contained in the collection
25                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

IX of ad(X)-invariant proper subspaces of h. We prove this by considering
the cases that (i) h is loxodromic, and (ii) h is contained in a compact open
torsion-free subgroup.
   In Case (i), h is conjugate by some c ∈ H to an element of the form
m exp(X), where m is elliptic and centralizes A, and X ∈ a+ is regular.
By inspecting the action of Ad(m) and Ad(exp X) relative to the root space
decomposition of h, we see that Im exp(X) ⊆ Iexp X and also that Iexp X = IX .
Therefore Ih ⊆ Ic−1 exp(X)c . We can write c−1 exp(X)c = exp(Ad(c)−1 X),
and therefore Ih ⊆ IAd(c)−1 X . This completes Case (i).
   In Case (ii), we can write h = exp(X). Then of course any ad(X)-
invariant subspace is Ad(h)-invariant. For the converse, note that if H is
                   n              n→∞
p-adic, we have hp = exp(pn X) −→ Id, and
                                  1
                 ad(X)v = lim       (Ad(exp(pn X)) − Id) v.
                             n→∞ pn
                                                                    n
Now let V be an Ad(h)-invariant subspace. Then V is also Ad(hp )-invariant
for any n, and by the above formula, is also ad(X)-invariant.
   Finally, by a theorem of Bois [Boi09], the Lie algebra h is 1.5-generated,
i.e. for every 0 ̸= A ∈ h there exists B ∈ h such that {A, B} generates h as
a Lie algebra. Further, the set of B with this property is Zariski open (see
[Boi09, Proposition 1.1.3]). Choose Y such that {X, Y } generates h, so that
IX ∩ IY = ∅. Since the set of possible choices of Y is Zariski open, we can
choose such Y that is loxodromic, i.e. Y = E + A where A is regular and E
is elliptic centralizing the maximal torus containing A. As we commented
before, for such elements we have Iexp Y ⊆ IA . Since exp(Y ) is loxodromic,
Ad exp Y contracts towards IY , so that after possibly replacing Y by a large
scalar multiple, Ad(exp Y )IX is contained in a neighborhood of IY disjoint
from IX , so exp Y ∈ S.
   It remains to show that for g ∈ S, the group ⟨g, h⟩ ⊆ H is Zariski dense.
Let g ∈ S and note that ⟨g, h⟩ is infinite (because h has infinite order),
and hence its Zariski closure has nontrivial Lie algebra, which is of course
                                                                   Z
⟨Ad(g), Ad(h)⟩-invariant. It follows that the Lie algebra of ⟨g, h⟩ is all of h,
         Z
i.e. ⟨g, h⟩ is open. However, any proper Zariski closed subgroup is nowhere
                               Z
dense, so we must have ⟨g, h⟩ = H.                                             □

Proof of Lemma 7.6:
Proof of (i): As U decreases, so does the Zariski closure of prj (Γj ) in Gj . By
the Noetherian property of Gj (Lemma A.6), these Zariski closures eventu-
ally stabilize, so we can assume stabilization has occurred at U , and denote
the corresponding Zariski closure by Hj ⊆ Gj . Then choosing V ⊆ U sym-
metric such that V 2 ⊆ U , it is easy to see that Hj2 ⊆ Hj and Hj−1 = Hj ,
i.e. Hj is a group. Further, if γ ∈ Γ is fixed, we can choose Vγ ⊆ U such
that γVγ γ −1 ⊆ U . It follows that Hj is normalized by prj (γ). Since γ ∈ Γ
was arbitrary, we conclude that Hj is normalized by prj (Γ), which is Zariski
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                            26

dense in Gj . Since Hj is Zariski closed, this implies that Hj is normal in
Gj , and since Hj is infinite, we must have G+                                +
                                                    j ⊆ Hj . Finally, since Gj is
Zariski dense (see Theorem A.4.(i)), we conclude that so is Hj .
   Proof of (ii): Let κj (Γj ) be the set of Cartan projections of prj (Γj ), and
let α be any simple root of Gj . We need to show that α is unbounded
on κj (Γj ). First note that prj (Γj ) is unbounded (since any sequence of
elements whose projections converge to the identity in G/Gj must diverge
in Gj ). Therefore κj (Γj ) is unbounded as well, and since the Weyl group
orbit of α spans the dual a∗ , there exists a Weyl group element w ∈ W such
that wα is unbounded on κj (Γj ).
   By a result of Tits [Tit66], there exists a finite extension W
                                                                f of W contained
in G such that if w e ∈ W has image w ∈ W , then Ad( e
                         f                                  w) coincides with the
Weyl group action of w on a. After possibly conjugating by an element of
A, we can assume W   f is contained in the maximal compact subgroup Kj of
Gj . Since Γ has dense projection to Gj and Kj is open, we can choose γ ∈ Γ
such that prj (γ) ∈ we−1 Kj , say prj (γ) = we−1 k for some k ∈ Kj . Now choose
γn ∈ Γj converging to the identity in Gj and such that (wα)(κj (γn )) → ∞.
For n ≫ 1, we have qj (γγn γ −1 ) ∈ U , so γγn γ −1 ∈ Γj . Let
                               prj (γn ) = ln an ln′
be the Cartan decomposition of prj (γn ). Then we simply compute
                      prj (γγn γ −1 ) = w
                                        e−1 kln an ln′ k −1 e
                                                           w.
           f ⊆ Kj , we see that the Cartan projection of prj (γγn γ −1 ) is
Using that W
given by
                       κj (γγn γ −1 ) = w
                                        e−1 an e
                                              w.
and
                          e−1 an e
                        α(w     w) = (wα)(γn ) → ∞.
                                                                               □

7.4. Application and question.
Question 7.7. Let G and Γ be as in Theorem 7.3, and assume r > 2. Does
Γ even contain a single k-generated finite index subgroup for some k < r?
Does Γ admit arbitrarily small k-generated subgroups for some k < r? E.g.
for k = 3 as in the results of Sarma-Venkataramana and Sarma mentioned
above? Or even k = 2 as in Lubotzky’s question and Meiri’s theorem?
   An elementary argument shows that if a chain of finite index subgroups
(Γn )n admits a refinement with uniformly bounded rank (in fact o([Γ : Γn ])
suffices), then (Γn )n has vanishing rank gradient. We include it for com-
pleteness:
Proposition 7.8. Let Γ be a finitely generated group. Let (Γn )n be a de-
creasing chain of finite index normal subgroups. Let (Γ′n ) be a decreasing
27                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

chain of finite index subgroups such that Γ′n ⊆ Γn for all n, and rk(Γ′n ) ≤ r
is uniformly bounded. Then the rank gradient of (Γn )n vanishes.
Proof. Let ε > 0 and let m ≥ n ≥ 1 be sufficiently large (we will specify how
large in a moment). First we bound the rank of Γ′n ∩ Γm using the trivial
bound as a finite index subgroup of Γ′n (see Equation (7.1)), and we find
                   rk(Γ′n ∩ Γm ) − 1 ≤ (r − 1)[Γ′n : Γ′n ∩ Γm ]
                                     ≤ (r − 1)[Γn : Γm ],
                                         (r − 1)
                                     ≤             [Γ : Γm ],
                                         [Γ : Γn ]
where for the second estimate we used that m ≥ n so that Γm ⊆ Γn and
Γ′n /(Γ′n ∩ Γm ) ,→ Γn /Γm . In particular, by choosing n ≥ 1 such that (r −
1)[Γ : Γn ]−1 < ε, we see Γ′n ∩ Γm is generated by at most ε[Γ : Γm ] many
elements. Now we need to show that by not adding too many generators,
we can actually generate all of Γm . For this we simply use the trivial bound:
                   rk(Γm ) ≤ [Γm : Γ′n ∩ Γm ] + rk(Γ′n ∩ Γm ).
Since Γm /(Γ′n ∩ Γm ) ,→ Γ/Γ′n , we can estimate the first term by [Γ : Γ′n ].
So far we have only used m ≥ n, but now take m sufficiently large so that
[Γ : Γm ] > ε−1 [Γ : Γ′n ]. Then we have rk(Γm ) ≤ 2ε[Γ : Γm ], as desired. □
     Therefore we have the following application of Theorem 7.3:
Corollary 7.9. Assume the Greenberg-Shalom hypothesis, and let G be as
in Standing Assumptions 2.1 with simple factors corresponding to different
places of Q, and Γ ⊆ G an irreducible lattice. Then the rank gradient of Γ
with respect to any infinite chain of finite index normal subgroups vanishes.


   As mentioned earlier, Fraczyk-Mellick-Wilkens have proven this result
unconditionally for higher rank lattices in real Lie groups and Mellick has
extended this to the case of at least some products with rank one factors. It
seems plausible (but we do not know) that their methods extend to the
setting of lattices as in the corollary as well. Those techniques do not
seem capable of addressing the more refined question of arbitrarily small
k-generated finite index subgroups.

 Appendix A. Background on algebraic groups, irreducibility
                     and Venkataramana’s Lemma
   We collect in this appendix a variety of results and proofs all of which
depend heavily on the theory of algebraic groups. We hope this makes the
main body of the paper more readable for audiences not familiar with these
ideas.
   We begin with a pair of important facts that drive our entire exploration.
One is classical, the other elementary.
                  the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                          28

Proposition A.1. Every totally disconnected locally compact group G con-
tains a compact open subgroup K. Furthermore G commensurates K.
Proof. The first statement is van Dantzig’s theorem see e.g. [Pon54, Theo-
rem 16]. The second statement can be proven by covering any conjugate of
K by finitely many K cosets, using that K is compact and open.          □
A.1. Preliminaries on simple algebraic groups. We will now review
classical results in the study of simple algebraic groups used in the main
body of the paper, and end by proving that under Standing Assumptions
2.1, the projections of Γ are Zariski dense. We start by fixing some notation:
Assumptions A.2. For the rest of this section, k denotes a local field of
characteristic zero, and H denotes a connected semisimple adjoint algebraic
group defined over k such that H(k) does not have compact factors.
  We write H := H(k). Let us start with the following useful definition:
Definition A.3. H + denotes the group generated by unipotent elements
of H.
  It is not necessary to assume k is a local field of characteristic zero, but
the definition of H + is more difficult in general. To simplify the discussion
and since we only need this notion for local fields of characteristic zero, we
will only give this definition (but see e.g. [Mar91, Section I.1.5]). We have
the following result due to Borel-Tits:
Theorem A.4 (Borel-Tits [BT73, 6.7, 6.9, and 6.14]).
  (i) H + ⊆ H is Zariski dense and (analytically) open. In particular H +
      has finite index in H.
 (ii) H + does not contain any proper subgroup of finite index. Hence every
      finite index subgroup of H contains H + .
   If k = R, then H + is the connected component of H that contains the
identity (see again [BT73, 6.14]). In particular, any open subgroup of H con-
tains H + . A nonarchimedean analogue is the following unpublished result
of Tits, with a published proof due to Prasad:
Theorem A.5 (Tits-Prasad [Pra82]). Assume in addition that H is almost
simple. Then any noncompact, open subgroup of H contains H + .
 In view of the above results, a subgroup ∆ < H is almost dense if and only
if its closure contains H + . Since the analytic closure is contained in the
algebraic closure and H + is Zariski dense, it follows that any almost dense
group is Zariski dense.
   The following general and basic fact will be used a number of times in
the sequel. We therefore separate it out for easy reference.
Lemma A.6. Let G be an algebraic group. Let Γ1 ⊃ Γ2 ⊃ · · · be a de-
                                                               Z
scending sequence of (possibly discrete) subgroups of G. Let Γi denote the
29                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek
                                                                      Z          Z
Zariski closure of Γi in G. Then, there exists N ∈ N such that Γi         = Γj
for all i, j ≥ N .
                                                Z        Z
Proof. Since Γ1 ⊃ Γ2 ⊃ · · · , it follows that Γi ⊇ Γi+1 for all i ≥ 1. Since
       Z
each Γi is Zariski closed, the Lemma follows from the Noetherian property
for Zariski closed subsets of G.                                           □
  Now, let us return to the situation of groups with almost dense commen-
surators and prove the following straightforward lemma:
Lemma A.7. Suppose Θ ⊆ H is an infinite subgroup with Zariski dense
commensurator ∆. Then, possibly after passing to a finite index subgroup,
there is a subset of factors HJ ⊆ H containing Θ and Θ ⊆ HJ is Zariski
dense.
Remark A.8. In the above lemma, we do not assume that Θ is a discrete
subgroup of H.
Proof. Consider the Zariski closures of finite index subgroups of Θ, partially
                                                                  Z     Z
ordered by inclusion. We say Θ′ ⊆ Θ is Zariski dense in Θ if Θ′ = Θ . By
(Lemma A.6), there is a finite index subgroup Θ′ of Θ such that any finite
index subgroup Θ′′ ⊆ Θ′ is Zariski dense in Θ′ . Let L be the Zariski closure
of Θ′ in H.
   We claim that ∆ normalizes L: Indeed, for any δ ∈ ∆, there is some finite
index subgroup Θ′δ ⊆ Θ′ with δΘ′δ δ −1 ⊆ Θ′ . Since both Θ′δ and δΘ′δ δ −1 are
Zariski dense in Θ′ , it follows that δ normalizes L. Since ∆ is Zariski dense
and L is Zariski closed, it follows that H normalizes L. Since H is adjoint,
we have L = HJ for some collection of factors J.
   Finally, we conclude that Θ is contained in HJ : Indeed, the image of Θ in
the remaining factors HJ c is finite and normalized by the projection prJ c (∆).
A finite index subgroup ∆′ of ∆ has projection to HJ c that centralizes the
image of Θ and is still Zariski dense, so that the image of Θ is central in
HJ c . Finally, since H is adjoint, HJ c is centerless.                       □
Remark A.9. The proof does not use the analytic topology on k, so the
statement is still true if k is a number field.
Lemma A.10. If G is as in Standing Assumptions 2.1 and Γ is a dis-
crete subgroup with unbounded projection to each factor and almost dense
commensurator, then for every i ∈ I, the projection pri (Γ) ⊆ Gi is Zariski
dense.
Proof. By assumption pri (Γ) has almost dense (and hence Zariski dense)
commensurator. Since pri (Γ) is unbounded, it is infinite, so Lemma A.7
implies it is Zariski dense.                                         □
   We end this subsection by giving the general proof of our key lemma
relating irreducibility and commensurators.
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                             30

Proof of Lemma 2.11. Since GJ c × K is commensurated by G, we see that
ΓK is commensurated by Γ. Since Γ is discrete in G, we see that ΓK is
discrete in GJ c × K and since K is compact πJ c (ΓK ) is discrete in GJ c .
Let I ⊂ J c be any subset of indices. Assuming πI (ΓK ) is discrete, we
will show that this implies πI×J (Γ) is discrete, contradicting irreducibility.
Take a sequence γi ∈ Γ such that πI×J (γi ) → 1. Then it is also true that
prJ (γi ) → 1 or that γi is eventually in ΓK . Since we assume ΓK is discrete in
GI×J this implies that γi is eventually the identity, the desired contradiction
to irreducibility.
   Now we consider the Zariski closure L of prJ c (ΓK ). Since Γ has dense
projection in GJ and commensurates ΓK , we see L is normalized by GJ . By
Lemma A.7, L is a product of factors of GJ . Thus there is an isomorphic
projection of L onto some subcollection of factors GI of GJ . Since ΓK is
discrete and contained in its own Zariski closure, this implies the projection
of ΓK to GI is discrete. As above this is a contradiction unless I = J, in
which case ΓK is Zariski dense.                                               □

A.2. Further theory of p-adic Lie groups. We will now discuss some
standard material on p-adic Lie groups that we need. A good reference
containing this material is [Ser06]. For p a prime, the field Qp of p-adic
numbers is the completion of Q with respect to the norm ∥xpk ∥p := p−k
where k ∈ Z and x ∈ Q has numerator and denominator coprime to p. Qp
is a locally compact field of characteristic zero.
   A p-adic analytic manifold of dimension n is a topological space with an
atlas of charts valued in Qnp , such that transition functions are analytic. It is
a p-adic Lie group if group multiplication and inversion are analytic maps.
In particular Qnp (as well as its open subgroup Znp ) and GL(n, Qp ) are p-adic
analytic groups. Several pertinent results behave as for real Lie groups:
Theorem A.11 (Cartan’s subgroup theorem [Ser06, Corollary, p. 155]).
Any closed subgroup of a p-adic Lie group is itself a p-adic Lie group.
   In particular, the Qp -points of an algebraic group, which is a closed sub-
group of GL(N, Qp ) for some N , forms a p-adic Lie group.
   Further, p-adic groups have Lie algebras. See [Ser06, Section V.1] for the
construction of Lie algebras for p-adic groups.
   A key difference between p-adic and real Lie groups is the structure of
open neighborhoods of identity: For connected real Lie groups, any open
neighborhood of identity generates the entire group. However, in the p-adic
setting, already Zp ⊆ Qp is an open subgroup. Furthermore, the decreasing
sequence of subgroups pk Zp , k ≥ 0, form a basis of the topology at the
identity. Similarly, GL(n, Zp ) ⊆ GL(n, Qp ) is a compact open subgroup, and
the congruence subgroups GL(n, Zp )[pk ] := ker(GL(n, Zp ) → GL(n, Z/pk Z))
form a basis of compact open subgroups at the identity.
   Therefore any p-adic linear group G admits a basis at the identity con-
sisting of compact open subgroups, namely G ∩ GL(n, Zp )[pk ], k ≥ 1. (The
31                brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

assumption that the group be linear is actually superfluous, but we will not
need the result in this increased generality.)
   Open subgroups as above yield an especially strong form of the Lie group-
Lie algebra correspondence over the p-adics:
Theorem A.12 (p-adic Lie group-Lie algebra correspondence (see [Ser06,
Theorem 3, p. 152, and Corollary 1, p. 156])). Two p-adic Lie groups
have isomorphic Lie algebras if and only if they contain isomorphic open
subgroups.
   Every finite-dimensional p-adic Lie algebra is realized by a p-adic Lie
group.
   Note that in [Ser06], the language of analytic group chunks is used, but in
the case of p-adics, every analytic group chunk contains an open subgroup
(see [Ser06, Corollary 1, p. 117] and also [Ser06, Corollary, p. 141]), yielding
the above simplified formulation of the correspondence.
   A last fact we will need is the metric behavior of power maps µd : x 7→
xd , d ≥ 1, near identity:
Proposition A.13. Let G be a linear p-adic group and d ≥ 1. Then on a
sufficiently small neighborhood U of identity, the map x 7→ xd is
  (i) a contraction if p | d, and
 (ii) an isometry if p, d are coprime.
  In fact, as the proof will show, it suffices to take U to be the first con-
gruence subgroup. The statement is also true more generally for all p-adic
groups, but we will not need it.
Proof. Write G ⊆ GL(N, Qp ). We work with the induced metric from
M (N, Zp ) given by the maximal distance between entries. Then an ele-
ment with distance p−k to the identity is of the form 1 + pk A for some
A ∈ M (N, Zp ) that is not divisible by p. For (i), note that
                     (1 + pk A)p = 1 + pk+1 A + O(p2k ),
which is at distance p−(k+1) from identity. So the pth power map is a
contraction.
  On the other hand, for (ii), we have
                      (1 + pk A)d = 1 + pk dA + O(p2k ),
which remains at distance p−k from the identity. So dth power preserves
distance to the identity.                                            □
A.3. Notions of irreducibility. In this subsection we prove Proposition
2.10 showing that irreducibility and strong irreducibility are equivalent. Re-
call that for a subset of factors J ⊊ I, we write prJ : G → GJ for the natural
projection. Our goal will be to prove that projections of irreducible groups
to proper subsets of factors do not merely fail to be discrete, but are in fact
almost dense:
                   the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                           32

Proposition A.14. Let Γ ⊆ G be discrete and irreducible. Then for any
proper subset J ⊊ I, the closure prJ (Γ)contains G+
                                                  J.
  We will often use the following observation without explicit comment:
Remark A.15. For a connected semisimple algebraic group H defined over
a field k of characteristic zero, passing from H(k) to H(k)+ commutes with
restriction of scalars (see [Mar91, Section I.1.7]), so that (Rp G)+ = G+
                                                                        p.
Proof of Proposition 2.10 from Proposition A.14. Recall that we defined Γ
to be strongly irreducible if it has almost dense projections. Since G+
                                                                      J ⊆ GJ
has finite index by Theorem A.4.(i), we see that Proposition A.14 shows that
any irreducible group is strongly irreducible. Conversely, since for all p, G+
                                                                             p
is Qp -Zariski dense in Gp by Theorem A.4.(i), the projection of a strongly
irreducible group to Gp is Qp -Zariski dense (and indiscrete), and therefore
any strongly irreducible group is, as the name suggests, irreducible.        □
   We start by proving Proposition 2.10 in the ‘pure’ case where all factors
of J are analytic over the same field. We will actually prove the following
stronger statement that will be used in the general case.
Lemma A.16. Let Γ ⊆ G be discrete and irreducible. Let p be a finite
prime or ∞ and let H ⊆ Gp be a closed, indiscrete subgroup normalized by
Γ. Then there is a subset IH ⊆ Ip such that G+
                                             IH is an open subgroup of H.
Proof. Since H is a closed subgroup of the analytic group Gp , its Lie algebra
h is well-defined, and since H is not discrete, h is nontrivial. Since h is
Ad(prIp (Γ))-invariant and prIp (Γ) is Qp -Zariski dense in Gp , it follows that
h is an ideal in the Lie algebra of Gp . Hence there is a nonempty subset
IH ⊆ Ip such that h = ⊕i∈IH gi . We will show that H contains G+      IH .
   To start, note that H ∩ GIH is open and closed in GIH . Openness fol-
lows from the fact that H ∩ GIH has the same Lie algebra as GIH . In the
archimedean case, H therefore contains the connected component of iden-
tity, which coincides with G+ IH . In the nonarchimedean case, it suffices to
prove H ∩ Gi is noncompact for every i ∈ IH , since then Theorem A.5 shows
that H ∩ Gi contains G+ i . To establish noncompactness, note that H ∩ Gi is
normalized by pri (Γ), which is unbounded by Lemma 2.9). Now notice that
any bounded open subgroup O has bounded normalizer by an application of
the Bruhat-Tits fixed point theorem. Openness implies that the fixed set of
O in the Bruhat-Tits building is itself bounded and so the normalizer fixes
its barycenter. So H ∩ Gi must be unbounded as well.                          □
Remark A.17. In the pure case, the the above lemma indeed shows irre-
ducibility implies strong irreducibility: Letting Γ be discrete and irreducible,
J ⊊ I, and taking H := prJ (Γ), the above Lemma gives a subset IH ⊆ J
such that G+   IH ⊆ H is open. In fact we must have IH = J: Since H/GIH
                                                                             +

is finite, if there exists j ∈ J\IH , then prj (H) and hence prj (Γ) would be
discrete, but this contradicts irreducibility of Γ. This shows G+  J ⊆ prJ (Γ)
and hence the latter has finite index in GJ .
33                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

  We will complete the proof of Proposition 2.10 in the general, possibly
mixed, case.
Proof. Write J = ⊔p∈PJ Jp where Jp consists of the Qp -analytic factors in J
and PJ is a finite subset of primes and possibly ∞. Let H denote the closure
of prJ (Γ). By passing to a finite index subgroup of Γ, we can assume that
H ⊆ G+                                    +
        J and we aim to show H = GJ . First, suppose that the connected
component of identity H ◦ of H is nontrivial (so that necessarily J∞ ̸= ∅).
We apply Lemma A.16 to the subgroup H ◦ and obtain that there is a subset
JH,∞ ⊆ J∞ such that G+               ◦
                         JH ,∞ ⊆ H is open. Therefore we can project to the
factors given by J\JH,∞ and assume JH,∞ = ∅.
   We will aim to show that after the above reduction, PJ consists of finite
primes and H contains G+     Jp for every p ∈ PJ . Since H is locally compact
and totally disconnected, it contains a compact open subgroup K. Because
K is compact and totally disconnected, its image in GJ∞ is finite, so that by
possibly shrinking K, we can assume K projects trivially to the archimedean
factors GJ∞ and therefore H has discrete projection. However, this is im-
possible because the projection of Γ ⊆ H to GJ∞ is indiscrete, so we must
have J∞ = ∅.
   It remains to show that H contains G+    Jp for every p ∈ PJ . For any integer
                              d
d define a map µd : x 7→ x of K to itself. Let Kp be the projection of K
to GJp for p ∈ PJ . By possibly shrinking K further, we can assume that
the mapQ µp is a contraction on Kp for all p ∈QPJ . Then we claim that
K = p∈PJ Kp . Indeed, let k = (kp )p ∈ K ⊆ p Kp . Fix p and let d be
the product of the remaining primes. Since µd is an isometry on Kp but a
contraction on Kℓ for all ℓ ̸= p, there is some sequence nm → ∞ such     Q that
 d nm      nm                           dnm
kp     = µd (kp ) → kp and hence k           → (kp , e, . . . , e) ∈ Kp × ℓ̸=p Kℓ .
Since K is closed, we see that Kp ⊆ K for all p ∈ PJ , as desired.
   Further, we claim that Kp is nondiscrete for all p ∈ PJ . Indeed, if the
image of K in GJp is discrete, then so is the image of H. This follows since
K contains the intersection of πJp (Γ) with an open neighborhood of the
identity in GJp . Since we know Γ has Q nondiscrete image this is impossible.
Since Kp is nondiscrete and K = p Kp is contained in H, it follows that
for every p, the intersection H ∩ GJp is nondiscrete. We apply Lemma A.16
to the subgroup H ∩ GJp and obtain that for every p ∈ PJ , there is a subset
JH,p ⊆ Jp such that G+  JH ,p ⊆ H is open.
   Set JH := ⊔p∈PJ JH,p . To complete the proof, we show JH = J: We have
shown above that G+   JH is an open subgroup of H, so the image of H in the
complementary factors GJ\JH is discrete. This contradicts irreducibility of
Γ.                                                                              □

A.4. A lemma of Venkataramana. In this subsection we prove Lemma
A.18 below, which we have used in the proof of Proposition 3.1. The argu-
ment below is similar to the proof of a lemma of Venkataramana’s first stated
as [LZ01, Lemma 2.3] and generalized in [FMvL24, Lemma 4.1]. The latter
                    the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                                 34

applies to subgroups Γ of S-arithmetic lattices containing a T -arithmetic
lattice for T ⊆ S. Here we need a slightly different version where Γ is not
given as a subgroup of a lattice, so we include it for completeness. Unlike
the citations above, what we need here does not requires any approximation
theorems. We shall use the following notation that is based on the proof of
Proposition 3.1:
    (1) G is as in Proposition 3.1.
    (2) Γ ⊆ G is a discrete and irreducible subgroup.
    (3) Gna is a non-empty product of nonarchimedean factors of G.
    (4) G0 is the product of the other factors of G and assume that G0 is
         non-trivial.
    (5) Kna ⊆ G+  na is a maximal compact open subgroup.
    (6) prna denotes the projection to Gna .
    (7) Γna ⊆ Γ denotes the subgroup that maps into Kna under the projec-
         tion prna to Gna .
    (8) pr0 denotes the projection to G0 .
Lemma A.18. Let G, Γ, Gna , G0 , Kna , Γna , pr0 be as above. Assume that
    • prna (Γna ) is dense in Kna .
    • pr0 (Γna ) is a lattice in G0 .
Then Γ ⊆ G is a lattice.
Proof. By passing to a finite index subgroup, we can assume without loss
of generality that Γ ⊆ G+ . Let F ⊆ G+     0 be a fundamental domain for
                           +
the lattice pr0 (Γna ) ⊆ G0 . As in Venkataramana’s lemma and [FMvL24,
Lemma 4.1], to show Γ ⊆ G is a lattice, we will show that F × Kna is a
fundamental domain for Γ ⊆ G+ .
   First we show the Γ-translates of F × Kna are disjoint: If γ(F × Kna ) ∩
(F × Kna ) ̸= ∅, then by projecting to the second factor and using that Kna
is a group, we see that γ ∈ Kna , and hence γ ∈ Γna . But then by projecting
to the first factor, we see that γF ∩ F ̸= ∅, and since F is a fundamental
domain for Γna , we conclude that γ = e.
   Next, we show that Γ(F × Kna ) = G. Since Kna is prna (Γna )-invariant
and F ⊆ G0 is a fundamental domain for pr0 (Γna ), it suffices to show that
prna (Γ)Kna = G. But this is immediate because prna (Γ) ⊆ G+ na is dense and
Kna is open.                                                               □

                                   References
[AGN17]   M. Abert, T. Gelander, and N. Nikolov. Rank, combinatorial cost, and homol-
          ogy torsion growth in higher rank lattices. Duke Math. J., 166(15):2925–2964,
          2017.
[AN12]    M. Abért and N. Nikolov. Rank gradient, cost of groups and the rank versus
          Heegaard genus problem. J. Eur. Math. Soc. (JEMS), 14(5):1657–1677, 2012.
[AOP+ 20] H. Akiyoshi, K. Ohshika, J. Parker, M. Sakuma, and H. Yoshida. Classification
          of non-free Kleinian groups generated by two parabolic transformations. 2020.
          arXiv:2001.09564.
35                  brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

[BBN59]  Gilbert Baumslag, W. W. Boone, and B. H. Neumann. Some unsolvable prob-
         lems about elements and subgroups of groups. Math. Scand., 7:191–201, 1959.
[BFMS23] Uri Bader, David Fisher, Nicholas Miller, and Matthew Stover. Arithmeticity,
         superrigidity and totally geodesic submanifolds of complex hyperbolic mani-
         folds. Invent. Math., 233(1):169–222, 2023.
[BM96]   M. Burger and S. Mozes. CAT(-1)-spaces, divergence groups and their com-
         mensurators. J. Amer. Math. Soc., 9(1):57–93, 1996.
[BM00a] M. Burger and S. Mozes. Groups acting on trees: from local to global structure.
         Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math., (92):113–150 (2001), 2000.
[BM00b] M. Burger and S. Mozes. Lattices in product of trees. Inst. Hautes Études Sci.
         Publ. Math., (92):151–194 (2001), 2000.
[Boi09]  J.-M. Bois. Generators of simple Lie algebras in arbitrary characteristics. Math.
         Z., 262(4):715–741, 2009.
[Bor66]  A. Borel. Density and maximality of arithmetic subgroups. J. Reine Angew.
         Math., 224:78–89, 1966.
[BQ16]   Y. Benoist and J.-F. Quint. Random walks on reductive groups, volume 62
         of Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete. 3. Folge. A Series of
         Modern Surveys in Mathematics [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas.
         3rd Series. A Series of Modern Surveys in Mathematics]. Springer, Cham,
         2016.
[BR84]   G. Baumslag and J. Roseblade. Subgroups of direct products of free groups. J.
         London Math. Soc. (2), 30(1):44–52, 1984.
[Bre55]  J. L. Brenner. Quelques groupes libres de matrices. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris,
         241:1689–1691, 1955.
[BT73]   A. Borel and J. Tits. Homomorphismes “abstraits” de groupes algébriques
         simples. Ann. of Math. (2), 97:499–571, 1973.
[BU23]   Gregorio Baldi and Emmanuel Ullmo. Special subvarieties of non-arithmetic
         ball quotients and Hodge theory. Ann. of Math. (2), 197(1):159–220, 2023.
[Bur16]  D        Burde.       https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/1616270/
         even-orthogonal-lie-algebra-d2. Stack Exchange Network, 2016.
[Cal61]  E. Calabi. On compact, Riemannian manifolds with constant curvature. I. In
         Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Vol. III, pages 155–180. American Mathematical
         Society, Providence, R.I., 1961.
[Cor92]  Kevin Corlette. Archimedean superrigidity and hyperbolic geometry. Ann. of
         Math. (2), 135(1):165–182, 1992.
[CRRZ22] Pietro Corvaja, Andrei S. Rapinchuk, Jinbo Ren, and Umberto M. Zannier.
         Non-virtually abelian anisotropic linear groups are not boundedly generated.
         Invent. Math., 227(1):1–26, 2022.
[DFH22] A. S. Detinko, D. L. Flannery, and A. Hulpke. Freeness and S-arithmeticity of
         rational Möbius groups. 2022. arXiv:2203.17201.
[EG18]   Hélène Esnault and Michael Groechenig. Cohomologically rigid local systems
         and integrality. Selecta Math. (N.S.), 24(5):4279–4292, 2018.
[FLSS18] D. Fisher, M. Larsen, R. Spatzier, and M. Stover. Character varieties and
         actions on products of trees. Israel J. Math., 225(2):889–907, 2018.
[FMvL24] David Fisher, Mahan Mj, and Wouter van Limbeek. Commensurators of normal
         subgroups of lattices. J. Éc. polytech. Math., 11:1099–1122, 2024.
[FMW23] M. Fraczyk, S. Mellick, and A. Wilkens. Poisson-Voronoi tessellations and fixed
         price in higher rank. 2023. arXiv:2307.01194.
[Gab00]  D. Gaboriau. Coût des relations d’équivalence et des groupes. Invent. Math.,
         139(1):41–98, 2000.
                     the greenberg-shalom hypothesis                                    36

[Gar66]  H. Garland. On deformations of lattices in Lie groups. In Algebraic Groups and
         Discontinuous Subgroups (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Boulder, Colo., 1965),
         pages 400–404. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1966.
[GR70]   H. Garland and M. S. Raghunathan. Fundamental domains for lattices in (R-
         )rank 1 semisimple Lie groups. Ann. of Math. (2), 92:279–326, 1970.
[Gre74]  L. Greenberg. Commensurable groups of Moebius transformations. In Discon-
         tinuous groups and Riemann surfaces (Proc. Conf., Univ. Maryland, College
         Park, Md., 1973), pages 227–237. Ann. of Math. Studies, No. 79, 1974.
[GS92]   Mikhail Gromov and Richard Schoen. Harmonic maps into singular spaces and
         p-adic superrigidity for lattices in groups of rank one. Inst. Hautes Études Sci.
         Publ. Math., (76):165–246, 1992.
[HM23]   J. Huang and M. Mj. Indiscrete common commensurators. to appear in Israel
         Journal of Mathematics, arXiv:2310.04876, 2023.
[Hru20]  E. Hrushovski. Beyond the Lascar group. 2020. arXiv:2011.12009.
[KK22]   S.-H. Kim and T. Koberda. Non-freeness of groups generated by two parabolic
         elements with small rational parameters. Michigan Math. J., 71(4):809–833,
         2022.
[KM21]   Thomas Koberda and Mahan Mj. Commutators, commensurators, and
         PSL2 (Z). J. Topol., 14(3):861–876, 2021.
[KM24]   Thomas Koberda and Mahan Mj. Commensurators of thin normal subgroups
         and abelian quotients. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 24(4):2149–2170, 2024.
[Kna69]  A. W. Knapp. Doubly generated Fuchsian groups. Michigan Math. J., 15:289–
         304, 1969.
[Lac05]  M. Lackenby. Expanders, rank and graphs of groups. Israel J. Math., 146:357–
         370, 2005.
[LLR11] C. Leininger, D. Long, and A. Reid. Commensurators of finitely generated
         nonfree Kleinian groups. Algebr. Geom. Topol., 11(1):605–624, 2011.
[LU69]   R. C. Lyndon and J. L. Ullman. Groups generated by two parabolic linear
         fractional transformations. Canadian J. Math., 21:1388–1403, 1969.
[Lub86]  A. Lubotzky. Dimension function for discrete groups. In Proceedings of
         groups—St. Andrews 1985, volume 121 of London Math. Soc. Lecture Note
         Ser., pages 254–262. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1986.
[LZ01]   A. Lubotzky and R. Zimmer. Arithmetic structure of fundamental groups and
         actions of semisimple Lie groups. Topology, 40(4):851–869, 2001.
[Mac23a] S. Machado. Approximate lattices in higher-rank semi-simple groups. Geom.
         Func. Anal., 2023.
[Mac23b] Simon Machado. Approximate lattices: structure in linear groups, definition(s)
         and beyond. preprint arXiv:2306.09899, 2023.
[Mag73] W. Magnus. Rational representations of Fuchsian groups and non-parabolic
         subgroups of the modular group. Nachr. Akad. Wiss. Göttingen Math.-Phys.
         Kl. II, pages 179–189, 1973.
[Mar75]  G. Margulis. Discrete groups of motions of manifolds of nonpositive curvature.
         In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians (Vancouver,
         B.C., 1974), Vol. 2, pages 21–34, 1975.
[Mar91]  G. Margulis. Discrete subgroups of semisimple Lie groups, volume 17 of Ergeb-
         nisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and
         Related Areas (3)]. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1991.
[Mei17]  C. Meiri. Generating pairs for finite index subgroups of SL(n, Z). J. Algebra,
         470:420–424, 2017.
[Mel23]  S. Mellick. Gaboriau’s criterion and fixed price one for locally compact groups.
         arXiv:2307.11728, 2023.
[Mj11]   M. Mj. On discreteness of commensurators. Geom. Topol., 15(1):331–350, 2011.
37                 brody, fisher, mj, and van limbeek

[MR03]    Colin Maclachlan and Alan W. Reid. The arithmetic of hyperbolic 3-manifolds,
          volume 219 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, New York,
          2003.
[Pon54]   L. S. Pontryagin. Nepreryvnye gruppy. Gosudarstv. Izdat. Tehn.-Teor. Lit.,
          Moscow, 1954. 2d ed.
[Pra82]   Gopal Prasad. Elementary proof of a theorem of Bruhat-Tits-Rousseau and of
          a theorem of Tits. Bull. Soc. Math. France, 110(2):197–202, 1982.
[Rag67]   M. S. Raghunathan. Cohomology of arithmetic subgroups of algebraic groups.
          II. Ann. of Math. (2), 87:279–304, 1967.
[San47]   I. N. Sanov. A property of a representation of a free group. Doklady Akad.
          Nauk SSSR (N. S.), 57:657–659, 1947.
[San81]   J.-J. Sansuc. Groupe de Brauer et arithmétique des groupes algébriques
          linéaires sur un corps de nombres. J. Reine Angew. Math., 327:12–80, 1981.
[Sar06]   R. Sarma. On virtual 3-generation of S-arithmetic subgroups of SL2 . Asian J.
          Math., 10(4):749–756, 2006.
[Sco73]   G. P. Scott. Finitely generated 3-manifold groups are finitely presented. J.
          London Math. Soc. (2), 6:437–440, 1973.
[Sel60]   Atle Selberg. On discontinuous groups in higher-dimensional symmetric spaces.
          In Contributions to function theory (internat. Colloq. Function Theory, Bom-
          bay, 1960), pages 147–164. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay,
          1960.
[Ser74]   J.-P. Serre. Problems. In Proc. Conf. Canberra (1973), volume 372 of Lecture
          Notes in Math., pages 734–735. Springer, Berlin, 1974.
[Ser06]   Jean-Pierre Serre. Lie algebras and Lie groups, volume 1500 of Lecture Notes
          in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2006. 1964 lectures given at Harvard
          University, Corrected fifth printing of the second (1992) edition.
[Sta63]   John Stallings. A finitely presented group whose 3-dimensional integral homol-
          ogy is not finitely generated. Amer. J. Math., 85:541–543, 1963.
[SV05]    R. Sharma and T. N. Venkataramana. Generations for arithmetic groups.
          Geom. Dedicata, 114:103–146, 2005.
[SW13]    Y. Shalom and G. Willis. Commensurated subgroups of arithmetic groups, to-
          tally disconnected groups and adelic rigidity. Geom. Funct. Anal., 23(5):1631–
          1683, 2013.
[Tit66]   J. Tits. Normalisateurs de tores. I. Groupes de Coxeter étendus. J. Algebra,
          4:96–116, 1966.
[Ven87]   T. N. Venkataramana. Zariski dense subgroups of arithmetic groups. J. Algebra,
          108(2):325–339, 1987.
[Wis20]   D. T. Wise. An invitation to coherent groups. In What’s next?—the mathemat-
          ical legacy of William P. Thurston, volume 205 of Ann. of Math. Stud., pages
          326–414. Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 2020.
[Yaa25]   Rotem Yaari. Long relators in groups generated by two parabolic elements.
          Groups, Geometry and Dynamics, Online First, 2025.
[Zim84]   R. Zimmer. Ergodic theory and semisimple groups, volume 81 of Monographs
          in Mathematics. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1984.
