Hello. It's been a while since my last video, but I'm going to try to experiment with some new um coding agent that I just installed recently. So, today I'm going to try a code code to repeat a task that I did 9 months ago on this YouTube channel where there was a particular statement in the equation theories project. There was this equation 1689, which implies equation two, and so there is a theorem to this effect. And we um had a human supplied proof of this of of this implication. And previously I used I think GitHub Copilot and Canonical going through step-by-step formalizing this proof by hand with some small AI assistance. So, that was that was 9 months ago. But now we have these um AI agents. So, I would doing the same thing again. Now, this is the third time I've used code code. So, I've actually tried this task twice already. I tried to record both times, but there were technical issues both times. The first time I just asked code to formalize it straight. Just say, "Please do the whole thing." It ran for about 45 minutes during which my computer crashed actually. And then it ran out tokens and did not finish and did not actually do anything. So, that was not really a success. The second time I asked it to do step-by-step. So, instead of asking to do the entire task, I asked first break it up into lemmas, formalize lemma one, lemma two, lemma three, and then fill in the proof of lemma one, the proof of lemma two, and so forth. And that actually worked and then about 25 minutes we were able to to get a complete proof, but unfortunately, I did not screen share properly. And so, um I it done. Uh, recording was not usable. Um, but what I did realize as part of that experience is that it helps to give uh, good instructions to Claude. Um, so I decided to write up up here a step-by-step recipe for what we're going to do. Um, so each um, in this human proof there's some um, notation. There's a there's some S and F uh, notation being introduced and then there's lemma one, lemma two, lemma three and we're just going to do um, to split it step-by-step. So let's let's get started. Um, uh, so I have to formalize the informal proof of I think it's called singleton law uh, provided in the equational domain um, using the step-by-step uh, procedure outlined at top of document. Okay. Um, you start with step zero formalizing um, the uh, S and F notations. This up. Let's see. Okay, so this should be a fairly straightforward task. All right, I did offer to do that and it uh, All right, good. We have that uh, a definition. Great. Okay. So uh, right. We've got some definitions. Uh, so now the next um, step that I laid out is to um, create the skeleton. And now uh execute step one. Um related to the skeleton will be increased um in which these statements number one two, three formalized. We do not try to prove them at this stage. So, uh sorry is the statement. Yeah, so um when I tried doing this um uh in one go, it would spend quite a lot of time working out how to prove these lemmas and then um making mistakes and catching it and then redoing it and not actually getting anything done. Just uh so it was also overthinking it uh quite a bit. So, uh hopefully um uh okay, so it has actually proposed um good formalizations. And then I asked it to uh to restructure the file to move the comments around. Um yeah, so I did have instructions here which will hopefully they will hopefully follow. Um I think the best practice is to actually create a markdown file with all of your instructions and supply that. Um but I was too lazy to do that. I I just I just put it in the lean file as a comment which I'm sure is going to be fine. Um all right, so that looks good. Uh let's see what it's done. So, it's created lemma one. Uh SBA equals ABFPC. Good. All right, so it looks like it has formalized and the lean has compiled. So, so far so good. I mean, of course it's all sorrys, but at least the um lemmas are stated correctly. Okay. Uh good. Okay, so um it knows we want step two next. Okay, so great. Uh let's do step two A. So, so uh step two A is to um take each of the lines of the proof in the one and turn them into individual lines of lean code with justifications given by sorry. Um I'm hoping it will not get bogged down trying to prove uh each of these steps cuz this is what I found slows it down um quite a bit. I can see it's still trying to understand the proof a little bit which makes some sense. I mean, it's it is possible that there are some typos in the proof. Um so, you do need some understanding, but I'm hoping it will just go and do it um and give me something, you know, in a matter of seconds rather than minutes. Um Okay, so it can run for a lot longer um and then you you don't do anything uh to be just watch uh but I find I I lose a lot less uh um information or sense of of what is actually going on. Okay, so it it uh Um all right, so it did that. Uh everything is is uh there's no reds. It it compiled. All right. Wait. Now, do step 2B. Okay, so it it understands that. So, there are three sorrys here. Oh, it it didn't even finish the final uh step which I guess could also have been a sorry, but um at least these should all be easy. Um and uh the way that is described doesn't match the uh informal description. Um when I first did this uh it expanded it didn't use the uh SNF shortcuts. It expanded things out um in full and so it was harder to read the proof, but but um here it's really looking like it is following the um informal proof quite closely, which is what I instructed it to to do. Uh yeah, so so here is where it's beginning to struggle a little bit. Um But ideally it can just sort of independently do H1 and then H2 and H3. Um Okay, so it seems to figure out H1. Yeah, so this is the backtracking that I talked about before. Um I'm sure it's burning a lot of tokens to do this actually. Uh Okay. Yeah, so it actually struggles a lot with the lowest level steps of the proof actually. Which is surprising because I would have thought that would have been the easiest part of this task. Um Oh, it's really &gt;&gt; More time than I expected. But what I'm thinking of doing for lemma two is ask it to skeletonize the proof as before that it did fairly well. Oh, it's it's close to finishing this task. Hopefully good. All right. So, it did solve it. Hmm, it took more than one line for each of these steps, but it did seem to eventually get a working proof. Uh All right. So, let's uh Wait. Now, let's do this step. Yeah. So, what I'm thinking of doing is um once it skeletonizes lemma two, I'm going to fill in the source by hand while simultaneously asking it to skeletonize lemma three. So, I'm I'm going to start Okay. Uh unfortunately, my computer has just crashed. Uh So, let me just pause and fix that. Okay. So, I've got my uh main computer back online. Um so, another advantage of doing things step-by-step is that it is easier to uh to resume uh when uh uh something unexpected happens. All right, so let's see if I can uh restore. Okay. Oh, okay. I gave it the wrong instruction. I wanted step 3A, not uh 2A. I think it understood because uh the text that it's talk- talking about is the steps number two. So, it is actually going to skeletonize that proof, hopefully. It's not that much faster than doing it by hand, I think um probably, but it is autonomous. You know, I could go away and come back uh or work on something else. Um so, I in particular, I'm going to try this parallel workflow uh once uh I get the skeletonization done. Oh, it's actually it's Well, okay, it's it's it is giving some sorrys, but it is actually also trying to to fill in uh filling in more steps than expected, but sure, we'll we'll accept that. Uh-oh. Uh so, it is an error. Okay, let's see how it fixes the error. Um okay, so it detected that one more steps Why it Okay. HP Oh, I get I see what happened. I think SA appears twice. Um but you only want to expand the first SSA um but not the second. Um So, for example, an S3 rewrite would work. Uh There are several things to do. You could cancel the like terms with a congruence. Yeah, so it has identified the problem as the SSA was being expanded too often. Hm, okay, it's All right, it's it's decided to do a different approach, which is to ex- Hm. This is not how I would do it. Interestingly, they I mean Okay, I'm just going to try to fix this by hand while um uh yeah. Um &gt;&gt; Okay, so now I have something to do here. Uh let's actually get the the info view out so I can see what I'm doing. Okay, so maybe what I should do is maybe cancel. Huh. That actually it was so powerful that it just worked. Um I was uh go to cancel both sides. Huh. And then somehow I was spun off to realize that what was left was actually um already provable. Okay, so I fixed that. Fine. Meanwhile, it is doing whatever it's doing for the next lemma. And over here why is this true? Um this is invoking my equation. Uh so I know that X is Y times X times Y Z Z. Y Z Z is another name for S C X. And the same argument as the first equation. In fact, this is uh special case of this. So, maybe what I'll do is I'll just pull this out as a separate useful lemma. Oops. Okay, so you start classes. I'll take that. Um Yeah, just for this Yeah, I I could get Coq to do this, I'm sure, but I will um No, actually, why don't I get Coq to do it. Um um The proof looking at the statement. HP and number two. It looks very similar to the statement. H1 number one. When you extract. Uh, the. H1. The standalone lemma. Um. You did to prove both uh, the. Uh. Uh, the beginning step. Number one. It's all as the one. In number two. I mean this is something I could definitely do myself, but um. So this should probably be equal to be. A quick task hopefully. It does seem to have understood what I asked for. It's going to create a. Key equation number or something. Good. All right. So it gave a very fancy name for it as left ideal. Okay, so now it's doing its stages. Okay, that's and then it replaces the previous H1 with a one-liner. And then this should also be a one-liner. So that we're coming next. Okay, so it can do multiple. Edits. All right, and then it did number three. Um. And what was nice was that it it didn't mind that I was editing something else. It just. Went ahead and and implemented these edits independently, which is great. Okay. Um Okay. Okay, so now I'll just get it to fill in. Sorry. I could try to use myself, but I'm satisfied that I can work in parallel with uh with this agent. Um which I think is is the best use uh use case where you keep involved. Um you just pick and choose the tasks that you want to work on so that you get some idea as what's going on. Uh and then in the background things that you're not so worried about um understanding because you've already you know, you're pretty quite confident that you've got a handle on it. You give it to uh this agent. Um I feel people actually run multiple agents doing multiple things at the same time. I uh I'm sure that is possible, but I'm already satisfied with having one agent, you know, uh I think I'll be too much of my mental space trying to organize multiple agents. Of course, you would say that maybe you should get another agent to run all the uh or your first few agents, but yeah, that that is uh too much for me, I think. Um Maybe I could have asked it Oops. Yeah, I wish I could have asked it to to normalize the final thing. So that I have something I then I could maybe like fill in one of these to Oh, we'll see. Okay, so it seems to have um figured out how to formalize each step. All right. All right, so again, there's a problem. I I will fix that. Um Let's see. Um Try Oh, it fixed it already. All right. Um all right, then I won't try to fix that. Okay. Uh new step five. I'm just eyeballing um these statements. They do need to match the informal proof quite well. Yeah, the lines here correspond to the lines in the informal proof. So, this is more or less how a human would formalize the exact same argument, I think. Um Yeah, so there's definitely a trade-off uh with So, it's much more automated. Um and it's very tempting to just turn your brain off and let the uh agent do what it can. Um Yeah, I could still step in and fix one uh individual lines. Um and I think you do need to keep doing that. Otherwise, um if you rely too much on these tools and something goes wrong, you may have no idea what to do or other than just call it to over and over again. Um but um I think we have to keep the proof aligned with the informal proof, which makes it a lot easier to read and debug. Um I I found that if you give the entire task to formalize to one of these agents, even if you have an informal proof, it may decide to just toss what you gave it and do its its own thing, and then you have much less uh of a of a chance. Um Okay. So, um I could try to do this in parallel, but I think I'm I'm I'm getting lazy. I says, "Okay, uh let's do Okay. I'm now pretty confident that this agent will can just finish these sorrys without any assistance. Um Yeah, I mean, I I could have tried to do one of these by hand just to keep in practice, but I think uh um I will skip doing that. Yeah, so you know, it's it's still is um thinking quite a bit. Like it it it's not It It doesn't seem to understand the proof quite at such a mechanical level that it can just dump it in. Um I mean, these should be one or two line proofs each. But uh it is really overthinking it quite a bit. Um Maybe it would have helped if I asked it to just formalize one at a time. Well, okay, whatever it it did it's done it. It's It's close to done at this point, so. Um Hm. It did actually uh these proofs look a little lengthy. Um I'm not expecting five line proofs. I'm expecting like a two line proof for each one. I could ask it to try to streamline the proofs, but given how much uh Ah, it's complaining about the one place where I actually changed the code. It doesn't like but it compile. But it is uh Okay, [snorts] it's criticizing my one contribution to the code. Um but it it worked. Um and it's a one-liner. Oh, not a one-liner. Um Yeah, I I Yeah, this was my proposed fix actually. It didn't work. The M3 I did not work, but congruence worked. Okay, it's it's some I um it's some magic congruence that I don't quite understand. But anyway, uh I'm done. There There's There's no error messages at all. Goal was accomplished. We have formalized the proof, and uh this took uh a lot. Um About half an hour, but this included a system crash. Um So, um Yeah, that is that is how you you formalize your pages. Um So, it it is it's a little different from doing it uh in the previous videos, but it it does work. Um and it can be and you can kind of select the level of automation that you're you're comfortable with. So, I will stop here.
