- Good afternoon. I'm Dan Freed. It's a pleasure to
welcome you to this third in the series of seven lectures on the Millennium Prize problems. It's a series of lectures sponsored by the Harvard Mathematics Department, the Harvard Center of
Mathematical Sciences and Applications, and the
Clay Mathematics Institute. You can find the previous
lectures on the CMSA of Harvard Center YouTube channel, and this lecture will also
appear there in about a week. So there's a lot I could
say about our speaker today, but I think it's best
if he says it himself. So we're delighted to have Pierre Deligne from the Institute for Advanced Study telling us what is the Hodge Conjecture. (students clap) - Thank you. So the Hodge Conjecture try
to characterize the circle, the common logic class of algebraic cycles on projective singular,
non-singular algebraic variety about the complex number. So the first thing I want
to do is try to give picture for all the words I just used. So first projective... (feedback whirs) (students laugh) First projective space, I start with projective line. (feedback whirs) (students chatter) (board whirs) So I could not go far enough (students laugh)
and to get the projective line to the line, you at one point to infinity. So I want to explain why. So in analysis, often, one
add one point in one direction and one point in the other direction. Here, I want only one
point for both direction, and the reason is as follow. Suppose you have some origin here and you look at a line through the origin, then for each position of the line, you hit a point on the line except when it is parallel, and then you will hit
this part at infinity, and you see the reason you have
only one point at infinity, you have only one parallel line, and if you move like
this, you go to infinity, and you come back from
the other direction. So an (indistinct) of infinity is like an (indistinct)
of any other point, and, also, one can
understand, in this way, projective coordinates. So if I have a coordinate system, I have the origin here, so to give a line to the origin, it's (indistinct) that I give some bound, and then I have this line, and two points which are
this proportional coordinate will give me the same line. So in this way, (chalk taps) you have projective coordinates for a point of projective line, which is a pair of point of
number x, y, not both zero, which will define the line,
which will define the point, the whole being that x, double dot, zero is the same as a multiple of it, and, yes, I could tell another
a way of thinking to this. You think that the wall
projective line is like a circle, and I want to see another way of this fact that if you go to infinity, you come back from the other direction. If you consider the function y = 1/x, (chalk taps) you see that same phenomenon. If x becomes closer and closer to zero, you get something bigger
and bigger at zero, and then you come back from
the other direction like this. So to this projective line, now, I want to tell projective plane, and then I will left projective space. So for the projective plane, you look at the plane of the blackboard, and then one add one
point for each direction, direction, meaning
system of parallel lines, and all those points which you get from the line at infinity, and
again if you have a direction going far in this direction
is the same as going far in the opposite direction
reach of the line it comes and, again, you can have
projective coordinates. Ah. (eraser taps) Ah. (talks indistinctly) (chalk scrapes) (chalk taps) So I have coordinates
in the ordinary plane. I have the origin here. This is to z-axis, and, now, again, for each position of this line, I have a point of projective plane, and if it is parallel, I get
one of the point at infinity, and so again, you see that
if I give x, y, z some bound, I get a point of projective line, x, y, z is up to a constant and that projective coordinate
on projective plane, so triple of bounds, x, y, z up to multiplication by a number, and, now, if you want projective space in each direction, you will add a bound. It will be to infinity and you have projective coordinate like this. So that's for projective space, and you see, it can be
expressed (indistinct). One remark is that if you want to describe some curve or some variety using equation, you should have a polynomial equation, but this polynomial should be homogenous so that it vanish if and only
if it vanish at the multiple. So to define curves of the
radian projective space, you use homogenous polynomials, if you want (indistinct) varieties. So far, I have been using real number, and it costs nothing, and it gets more interesting
if you use complex numbers. So the usual rule of the game is you make the picture into real space or real projective space,
and you don't forget, when needed, that, in
fact, you are speaking of the complex projective space where something are simpler, in fact. So let me give an example of
how things become more simple. (eraser swooshes) (eraser taps) If you take, for
instance, the cubic curve, this one, or...
(chalk taps) Then if you look at the real
locus, the real solution, the shape are very different. From one, you will have
something like this, and for the other, you will have something like this. So you see that... Of course, I would try to (indistinct) so, then it's the... I have added the bound of
infinity to what I have drawn. So it showed that it can be difficult just for knowing to the
degree of basic property of the equation to tell what
kind of shape you will have, and if I look with some number here, there will be a transition
in between the two where I get something like this. Before, like this, when one is a thousand even like that. Now, in the complex story, you don't have this kind of problem to basic wave of the set of (indistinct) will be the same. It will be a torus in both cases. The reason for that, here, what happened is you had some barometer you were putting, and there were some singular
value for this barometer, where you got this singular bound, yes, and the wrong picture
for lambda equal zero, I have a cusp. Now, in the complex domain,
again, there will be some singular value for
lambda, the same value, zero, but, now, you have the
wall set of complex number, which is a plane, and you can go around this point, and then you see that the
topology will not change. So for instance, if you take an upper, a pair surface of some
degree with no singularity, the topology will not depend on the actual coefficients you have, but what happens, it can be
very interesting to understand what happens when you turn
around the singular bound. So instead of a term, you
have but one (indistinct). Now, I still find it quite miraculous that just writing some equation
into complex situation, one can obtain very nice
varieties of spaces, which could be difficult
to picture otherwise, and, also, what is as surpassing
is that having two equation can be used to understand this, the shape of those spaces. So as an example, in the real
case in a projective plane, if you take a curve
defined by one equation, the topology rather boring. You will have first a bunch of circles. Here, but it can be complicated. Some circle can be inside another circle, but like in the case of
cubic, you have the example, in one case, you had just one circle, and you have topologically two circles. Now, in the complex situation, if you look at complex plane curve, if you take a line, then what you get is simply a two sphere. The picture is that you have the complex number forming a plane. You add one point at infinity but just one point for all of it, and then what you get it to
sphere, because you can... It's obtained by gluing the unit disc with the complement of the unit disc, which is the same but a
transformative and z two, one over z, and so you have two discs, which you glue along the boundary, and this gives you a sphere. For conics, it's the same. So the grade two equation, and the (indistinct) and
that if you have a conic, and you take a part on it, you can use it to project on a line, and this give you a
one-to-one correspondence, this bound with this bound, and you have the tangent,
which also give a bound, and I thought we've already said if you have a cubic plane curve, you get something like a torus, and in general, for a
curve of the degree d, you get something like a
torus with a number of holes, the number of holes being d-1, d-2 over 2. Yes, I would like to
give another example that it's miraculous that,
oh, just the equation can be used to construct
interesting shapes. Here, we had only variety
of even real dimension, but you can also get interesting
thing in odd dimension. If you take a singularity
like the one given by x square plus y square plus... I hope I left it, the correct number. So I want to... I don't have to check how many, (chalk taps) and, yes, this is in the ordinary... See example that's the little dot. I don't remember how many. So you have this, a singularity. Now, you can cut it with a small sphere, and to
intersect the real sphere, and the intersection will be something interesting of odd dimension, and for instance, for this one, if you take the correct
number of variable, you obtain something, which is the seven sphere topologically but not as a differentiable manifold, and the equation can be
used to find in variant, which give you what it is. So that's what I want tell, the picture I wanted to give
about complex projective, non-singular algebraic varieties. Now, I need to explain something about homology and cohomology. Again, I will try to give pictures, (eraser scrapes) So there's some variety like this plane. Now, I'm not especially
complex for the time being, A zero circle is just a sum of bounds with some integral coefficients. Now a one circle will look like a bunch of circle but over it, it can be more complicated, and no boundary. So I don't want to have
something like this. So one circle are one
dimensional oriented. You can integrate things
over them and no boundary. Two circle are something two dimensional if you are increased (indistinct), and, again, with no boundary, and you have also trains. For instance, if you... This will be a train, and
it will have a boundary (chalk taps) which is a zero circle. (chalk taps) Here, what I have drawn is
the boundary of dual chains, and because it's a boundary
itself and has no boundary. So this is an approximate picture, but you think you see those things you have to look at circles, and consider two circles are
equivalent if they are... The boundary... Or that the circle is equivalent to zero. if it is the boundary of something. For instance in 3D space, if you have two circle like this, yeah, that's too easy. When you can add, fill it like this, or you could fill with a
cylinder between the two. So you have homology equals
circles modulo this equivalence and in 3D space or 2D space,
it's not very interesting. For zero circle, you have the
cluster of the zero circle depends only on the sum of the ni, and all the rest is zero. Every one circle is the
boundary of something. Every two circle is the
boundary of something, but if you look at more interesting shape, then that's not the case. So suppose you look at those. (chalk taps) Then if you look (chalk thunks) (chalk taps)
at this circle, it's not the boundary of anything or the same, if you look at this circle, and, in fact, any circle this given this
linear combination of those two, n times the one times those
times the multiple of the other, and I would like to give
a picture explaining this. To see this, I like to think of the torus (paper rustles) as follow. You take, first, the cylinder. Now, it's difficult with paper using how it's garden hose, cut, and then you glue like this. Now. a convenient picture for this is that you redo it (chalk taps)
as a square, but you will identify those two sides, that's to make the cylinder, and after that, you identify those two. So what I have written here, on the one end, I will left this circle which is something closed, because this is the
same point as this one. The other one is this circle, and, now, let consider something else. I will make one turn wrong
(chalk taps) but in the same time, I will make a turn (indistinct). So this will give me this, and this is another
example of natural circle, and at least, in this
example, you see that this one is homologous
to the sum of those two. So that's homology, and, listen, I would say that the reason I start speaking
of homology is that if you have an algebraic
cycle, something defined by a cliff and in
complex projective space, it gives you a circle
always of even dimension, and we will want to understand what the class of that circle are. Now, I need to speak of cohomology. Now, you are somewhat familiar with it if you know something
about electromagnetism or about fluid mechanic because it appears somewhat in these guys. So then we are familiar
with the following, you have functions in the 3D space, (chalk taps) your vector field, (chalk taps) again, vector field, (chalk taps) and again functions, (chalk taps) and you have not your whole map to a function you can
associate its gradient, to a vector field, you
attach its rotational, and to a vector field, you
can attach its divergence, and the basic property is that the composite of two such map is zero, and so we can do again what
we did with the circles. We can look for objects which map to zero but taking two equivalent
if there are different in the image of the previous one. So those are the cohomology group, and as it was to case for homology, nothing interesting happens in that end. You wish that the only
functions was gradient is trivial is the constant function, and so that's the first cohomology group, but for the rest, if a vector
field at zero rotational, it's a gradient. If a vector field has
zero divergence rotational and any function is a divergence. So you have that whole, the Hi, zero. The same thing that we
had for homology in R3, and the same way that if you don't work in this space but in a more interesting
space, you can redo things. Now, this is a bad way
to look at this complex, because I have used the metric
to be able to have like this, but on any manifold one
can do something similar, and let me tell... And one will have the sequence of space indexed by zero to n,
when n is the dimension. So let me give the simplest case, where I consider simply a circle. Then I have functions, (chalk taps) which I view as function of an angle, and I can map them to their derivative, which are, again, function of an angle. Now, as before, a function
whose derivative is zero will be a constant function. So the zero cohomology
group will be the constant, but this is more interesting. If you take the derivative
of a function on the circle, it's integral will have to be zero, because the integral tells you high from one point to another,
but if you go all around, you did not derive at all. So in this case, you will
have, for the circle, H zero is R, see, and H one is R also, and you see that it is this circle which is responsible for the
existence of this homology, and so in general, you have the same story that the obstruction for which those group
corresponds exactly to the circle modulo homology you can hide. Okay. So sometime, I will be a little vague between homology and cohomology, because in addition, there is some duality which you see here, sometimes, even here, vector (indistinct), and so in fact, it's
naturalized (indistinct) homology and cohomology
and I will be vague when I use one or the other. Now, another thing which one see is the... So if one look at the complex variety, like something defined by a
cliff in a projective space, and I assume non-singular,
so near a point, if you look with a microscope, it's just look like CN for some n and in particular, if you
look at the tangent space, the tangent space of a
bound x is a c vector space, in the same way that
for an ordinary variety, tangent space are vector space. If you're in a complex situation, tangent space are complex vector space, and what I will care about is
that this gives them symmetry. If you have a c vector space and a vector, you can multiply it by a complex number of absolute value one. So you can make this kind of rotation, and you have... (board whirs) In the complex number,
you have the unit circle, and if you're in a complex vector space, you can multiply a vector by a complex number of up to... So you have to circle action, and as you see, here, this the harm complex is
based, essentially, on vectors and things you can do with it. So it's not surprising that you have this action of the circle also, on each pieces of
this the harm complex, you have to look at the exact definition and a better definition
(indistinct) to the harm complex. Now, those maps are not at all compatible with this action of the circle, but one of the beautiful
discovery of Hodge is that despite this fact,
the symmetry you have by the action of the circle
passed to the cohomology. So you look at some cohomology class, it will be possible to
represented by something so that if you move it by the circle, it remain with zero differential, and then we have a... This gives the way of how to multiply this cohomology class by a complex number, in fact, to act, to have the circle acting on the cohomology. So that's the basic fact of (indistinct), that if you look at the cohomology of complex algebraic variety, on it, you have a circle action coming from the action of the circle on each tangent space, and, now, again, state
the Hodge Conjecture as Hodge stated that if you
have an algebraic cycle, on the one end, you
have something integral. Integral homology or cohomology class will not make the difference, and, also, it will be fixed
by this action of the circle. That's what it means by type pp, and the conjecture is that is... The conjecture of Hodge was that this was characterizing the
class of algebraic cycles. Now, what are the difficulties? First, it's wrong, (all laugh) and this was found by Atiyah
and Hirzebruch that you... And then, also, one thing I would say when I say algebra cycle, one
is things defined by its wave and that they have to be
taken with a multiplicity, which can be positive or negative. So we have in difference of
concrete algebraic objects. Now, all the counter example we have, it's remained true that the multiple will be given by an algebraic cycle. So if (indistinct)
coefficient has a null number, then Hodge Conjecture remain possible, and that the (indistinct)
of Hodge Conjecture, but it was not what Hodge was telling. Now, another difficulty
is that we have no good... We would like to have more
pre precise conjecture. For instance, we would like to know which multiple is needed so that one can hope it to become algebraic, and the recent example that you can have a family of variety, some circle which is odd all along, if you deform it with the family, but you need a different
multiple for it to be algebraic. So it's not a topological question to know which multiple is needed, Another problem is that
we don't know at all when you can have a multiple
of something positive, an actual cycle and not something
is positive and negative, and this make a lot of method to construct object in applicable, because if you wanted to have
an analytic construction, usually, you want to have the minimum of something
and hope for the best, but if you have an object
which is both plus and minus, it's not clear how you can do anything. So those are some first difficulty. Now, I would like to... So why it is so difficult
to add, approve, or disprove the Hodge Conjecture? First, if you want to prove it, you have to construct algebraic cycle, and then we really have very
few methods for doing that. Naively, you think you
have of a variety defined by polynomial equals to
zero in projective space, and you add some more polynomial,
and you get something. What you get will be not interesting. Well, it's well accounted
for, and you need much more. Now, if you, how to do this algebraic, the only thing which can happen, that you take a few equation
to define some circle, and this circle will be reducible, will split into two pieces,
and then you can take one of the piece, and this
could be something interesting, but we have really no good way of knowing when you can hope that some
complete intersection like this will decompose into pieces. Let me give one example of such decomposition, which is completely relevant
for Hodge Conjecture, because it isn't a case
where we know everything but to tell how things happens. So I will be in P three, and I will consider... (chalk taps) Yet, no I would not... (hand swishes) I will use projective coordinates. So I would write mu four, t mu three, t two, two. Ah, no I need three here. (chalk taps) So this were given, t and mu, defines a point in projective 3D space. So this is a curve in projective 3D space, and it's easy to find some
quadric on which this curve lie, because if you take the
product of those two number, it's the same as the product of those two, and I let you find two other quadric, which gives this. Now, if you take two of those quadric, what you will get is a line plus the curve I am considering. So this is an example of
where things decompose. What happened is that if two quadric, which have a line in common, so the intersection contain this line and something else which
is a curve like this, so here, (indistinct),
things can decompose, but to predict when this will happen and to relate it to the
property we want for Hodge, we have no idea. Now, I want to explain another difficulty is that it's harder on natural to consider only the class in cohomology, this class invariant by the circle. Because if you consider (device rings) an actual algebraic cycle, there is a much more precise invariant which one can consider. So I told you that the
cubic curve, it's a torus. This torus has a natural group low, and so if one has a collection of bounds, zero circle, one can take the sum, and one has an invariant,
which is a point of the torus, and so that's a continuous
invariant attached to a cycle, and in general, if you have
a cycle Z of codimension d, you will have this invariant
I was telling in H two d, but in addition, you have not... If this first invariant is zero,
you have a second invariant in the real cohomology preceding group modulo of the integral, (chalk taps) something like a product of circles, and in an extension of the odd group by this continuous group,
that's where it's natural to look at what the class of a circle is. Now, why does it matter? (eraser swooshes) A basic method for trying to understand algebraic variety is to cut
some in slice like a salami. So you have some algebraic variety, if I were in a fine space,
I would say I cut some with parallel (indistinct),
(chalk swooshes) and so those sections have one smaller, one less complex dimension, and many things can be done by trying to reconstruct the property of the variety in term of this collection of slats. Now, a case which happens in some... Oh, yes, I would say that the basic difficulty here is that one as this Hodge Conjecture here to tell which classes are algebraic, but if we look at the extension group, which is the natural
receptacle for a class, we have no idea which come
from algebraic cycles, and we know that outside
very special case, not all come from algebraic cycle in the extension group we have there. Now, the reason it matter, suppose you have some, some cohomology class in this odd group, so an integral object with
some invariance by the circle. Often... So it can be given by topological circle, let's assume, and you can cut it restricted perpendicular with each slice, and the interesting case is when you cut, (chalk taps) you get something which is zero, and then if you knew the more precise class of the cycle, if you knew where in this group you are looking for some cycle, then you would be able, for each section. No, no, if you just cut, you get zero, but in interesting case, you can predict where you would live in
this more refined group, if you had an actual algebraic cycle, and if for each cut, you
were able to find the cycle, algebraic cycle with the correct class in this more precise sense, then you can hope to be able
to glue some or to guess, to obtain the cycle in (indistinct), but there are a few case when this works where you know that all
possibilities are satisfied, and then this method proved to algebraic, with the case of cubic
four falls, for instance, can be reached like that. (person talks indistinctly) Ah, yes. But in general, this classing methods, we cannot use it. So that's why it's difficult to prove it. Now, why is it difficult to disprove it? So at first, that there
would should be many methods because there are many ways to construct a homology
of algebraic variety. I have explained two of them, integrally with actual
cycle, topological cycle in term of the harm complex, and this can be refined by using differential form, which
if you are permanent, if (indistinct) equation
with rational coefficient, you can obtain some rational vector space instead of those real vector spaces. For some other theory, you
can get some Galois action, and for each theory, what
comes from algebraic cycle are some very special properties. So you would say, "Let us
pick your preferred cycle, and let us check if it
satisfied the criterion which come from the other
cohomology theories." Now, the problem is that
I would say there are two kinds of algebraic cycle
one can try to play with. First, there are some obvious one. For instance, (student coughs) if I have a variety x of dimension d, I can look at two cohomology group which are equidistant from the middle, and I can pass from cycle
corresponding to one to cycle corresponding to the other by cutting with other plane, and one knows that for Hodge cycle, (chalk taps) this is another morphism. So this give a wave from an odd cycle of small codimension to deduce a cycle of, odd cycle of big codimension, and big, such an odd cycle of big codimension, that's a candidate of cycle, but because there is a
reasonable way to construct it, it will pass all the criterion corresponding to all
the cohomology theories. So that's for obvious cycle, you don't make an example like that, and the problem is that, essentially, except very few cases, it's very difficult to
construct an odd cycle except by exhibiting it
it as an algebraic cycle. The problem is as follow, the definition of this
action of the circle on the real cohomology, which
is used in the definition, is something analytic, and by both force, you cannot tell if something is fixed by
a cycle or almost fixed, and in practice, it's not even possible to tell that if you move a little, the barometer, it will
become exactly fixed. So we have, in general, new methods of exhibiting candidate of cycle. So that's why we are not able
to use all those criterion to prove that something is not algebraic. Now, I had promised to say a little about what we care about
the conjecture also. So the beginning of algebra variety was the theory of elliptic integral and marginal variety
of a billion integrals, and this is all related to
the first cohomology group (chalk taps) of an algebraic variety, and a billion variety of
those first cohomology group of a beautiful theory, and one would like very much
to have something similar for higher cohomology group, and a first thing one would like to do is to extract, from an algebraic variety, something which reflects only
some higher cohomology group, and the idea of
(indistinct) for doing this is to construct some endomorphism of the cohomology using algebraic cycles, that one has a projection to
one cohomology group only, but that's a theory of motive with the, which could be used to many things if one has a good theory of motive, it tells things about some integral having rationality properties
or related to two pi i, but, essentially, for not (indistinct), it would be a big help to
have a good theory of motive and to be able to understand better the higher cohomology
group of algebraic variety, and it's early, but
that's all I have to say. (students clap)