Last month I shared a puzzle about
bacteria replicating on a grid. We start
with just one cell at the origin and at
any point if the spots one above and one
to the right of that bacterium are
empty, then it's allowed to replicate
populating both of those spots leaving
the previous spot it was on unoccupied.
The puzzle is to find the minimum number
of moves required [music] to clear all
16 lattice points inside this box here.
A natural place you might start is with
a smaller box. For example, at the
smallest case clearing that one first
lattice point obviously just takes one
move. If you move up to a 2 by 2 box
with four lattice points, after a bit of
playing around you'll find that it takes
eight moves to clear that box. So you
might be thinking, you know, what's this
pattern? Could it be something related
to powers of two? But as soon as you
jump up to a 3 by 3 box with nine
lattice points, it becomes clear this is
[music] going to take an astronomical
number of moves to clear it out. Just to
make space for the cell at 2 0 to
replicate once, we need all these other
cells to replicate first. In fact, it
starts to seem unlikely that it's even
possible to clear this box of nine
lattice points, let alone one with 16
lattice [music] points. Often in problem
solving, if you're trying to reason
about a situation that can unfold in
some huge or infinite number of ways,
it's often helpful to find some quantity
that always must remain the same no
matter what choices are made. In this
case, if you think about how each
replication [music] moves you from one
of these diagonal lines to its neighbor
on the right, then because each
replication turns one [music] cell into
two, you might think to count the total
number of cells with a weight where each
line has half the weight of the
preceding one. So for example, the point
at the origin has a weight of one, all
of the points on this line have a weight
of 1/2. So after the first replication,
the total weighted sum of the cells
stays fixed at one. And more generally,
with the weights as we have them labeled
here, any move [music] that you make
doesn't change the total weight. So no
matter what you do, the weighted sum of
all the bacteria on the grid has to stay
fixed at where it started, namely one.
So in order to clear a box, you need the
sum of all of the weights outside of
that box to be at least one. Without
this, even given infinite time, the
bacteria could never possibly escape.
So, a natural next step is to add
together all of the weights on this
infinite grid. Now, you might know that
1 + 1/2 + 1/4 and so on converges to 2.
>> [music]
>> This gives us the sum of the first row
of lattice points. Repeating this for
each of the rows above and adding up the
results, you get a very similar sum that
converges to 4, meaning the total weight
on the entire grid is only four. But,
the sum of the weights inside that box
with 16 lattice points adds up to be a
little above 3.5. So, the sum of the
weights outside that box is notably less
than one, meaning there is simply no way
to cram all of the descendants of that
first bacterium outside of that box. So,
the puzzle is a little bit cruel. The
answer is that it's impossible, and this
is the proof. In fact, there's no way
for the bacteria to even escape this
smaller 3x3 box of nine lattice points,
since their weights add up to 3.0625.
And you can even make the argument that
this shape with eight lattice points
could only be cleared just barely if you
had infinite [music] time, since the sum
of its weights is exactly three.