Freiman’s Constant
I recently asked people on Mastodon
“What’s the most surprising fact you’ve learned in the last couple of weeks?”
It was a nice way to learn a lot of interesting things.  My own biggest recent surprise was this: the number
plays a fundamental role in number theory!
For any irrational
we define its
Lagrange number
to be the supremum of numbers
such that
has infinitely many solutions for rationals
So, the easier
is to approximate by rational numbers, the bigger its Lagrange number is.
Quite famously, the golden ratio has the smallest possible Lagrange number, namely √5.  This means it’s as hard as possible to approximate using rational numbers.
The set of all Lagrange numbers is very complicated, and very interesting.   But here’s the shocking fact: if
then every real number
is a Lagrange number, and
is the smallest number with this property!
is called ‘Freiman’s constant’, because he proved this fact.  His proof is 100 pages, and I don’t want to read it… not even counting the fact that it’s only available in Russian:
• G. A. Freiman,
Diophantine Approximations and the Geometry of Numbers (Markov’s Problem)
[in Russian]. Kalinin State University Press, Kalinin, 1975.
There’s a lot more crazy stuff known about the set of all Lagrange numbers, which is called the
Lagrange spectrum
.  As mentioned, the smallest number in the Lagrange spectrum is
.  The next is
The next is
The next is
In 1879, Markov showed that such numbers form an increasing sequence that converges to 3.  They are precisely the Lagrange numbers of numbers whose continued fraction expansion and eventually consists only of 1’s and 2’s and is eventually periodic, like this:
3 is the Lagrange number of every number whose continued fraction expansion eventually consists only of 1’s and 2’s and is
not
eventually periodic.  Above 3 the Lagrange spectrum becomes much richer.  It’s a fractal: it has infinitely many gaps, but positive Hausdorff dimension, with the dimension increasing as we move up.
Moreira showed that when we reach
the Hausdorff dimension of the Lagrange spectrum hits 1.  And as mentioned, Freiman showed that above
the Lagrange spectrum is a half-line.  Directly below Freiman’s constant, Freiman showed there is a gap of width roughly
Here is the classic reference in English on this subject:
• Thomas W. Cusick and Mary E. Flahive,
The Markov and Lagrange Spectra
, AMS Mathematical Surveys and Monographs
30
, AMS, Providence, Rhode Island, 1989.
The Markov spectrum is another set, containing the Lagrange spectrum, and their relationship is very interesting.  Here’s a free online reference that reviews all the basics before doing more:
• Carlos Gustavo Moreira,
Geometric properties of the Markov and Lagrange spectra
,
Annals of Mathematics
188
, 145–170.
For a stripped-down account, go here:
• Wikipedia,
Markov spectrum
.
Related
This entry was posted  on Thursday, May 7th, 2026 at 10:27 pm and is filed under
mathematics
.					You can follow any responses to this entry through the
RSS 2.0
feed.
											You can
leave a response
, or
trackback
from your own site.
Post navigation
« Previous Post
Next Post »
8 Responses to
Freiman’s Constant
John
says:
7 May, 2026 at 10:41 pm
‘Carlos Gustavo Moreira, Geometric properties of the Markov and Lagrange spectra’ is at
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1612.05782
not
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1612.0578
Reply
John Baez
says:
7 May, 2026 at 11:21 pm
Thanks for catching that!
Reply
Alvaro Riascos
says:
8 May, 2026 at 12:38 am
Last reference is taking to a different paper. AR
Reply
John Baez
says:
8 May, 2026 at 4:10 pm
I think it’s fine now.
Reply
Allen Knutson
says:
8 May, 2026 at 7:34 pm
So what numbers have F as their Lagrange number?
Reply
John Baez
says:
8 May, 2026 at 11:41 pm
Good question.  In the process of trying to answer this I realized had made a bad mistake, which I’ve tried to fix. I believe the Lagrange spectrum up to 3 works like this:
The smallest number in the Lagrange spectrum is
.  The next is
The next is
The next is
These numbers form an increasing sequence that converges to 3.  They are precisely the Lagrange numbers of numbers whose continued fraction expansion is eventually periodic and eventually consists only of 1’s and 2’s, like this:
3 is the Lagrange number of every number whose continued fraction expansion is
not
eventually periodic, and eventually consists only of 1’s and 2’s.
Alas, I don’t know a number whose Lagrange number is Freiman’s constant.
Reply
John Baez
says:
9 May, 2026 at 10:45 am
I have escalated your question to MathOverflow:
•
What is a number whose Lagrange number is Freiman’s constant?
Gro-Tsen made a lot of progress, but apparently hadn’t quite found the right number at the time I’m writing this.  He suggested trying
But apparently the Lagrange number of this is not Freiman’s constant but
which is
less than Freiman’s constant.
There are reasons to think that the right number will lie in
but let’s not count our chickens (or explain them) until they’ve hatched.
Reply
John Baez
says:
10 May, 2026 at 10:22 am
Okay, Allen.  You wanted this: here it is.
On MathOverflow
, Gro-Tsen has used ideas from the proof Theorem 3 in Chapter 4 of Thomas W. Cusick and Mary E. Flahive’s
The Markov and Lagrange Spectra
to find an infinitude of different numbers having their Lagrange number equal to Freiman’s constant.  These numbers are described as continued fractions that never repeat.  I conjecture that they are transcendental.
Then, in a comment to what Gro-Tsen wrote,
legionmammal1978
showed that no quadratic surd can have Freiman’s constant as its Lagrange number.  The argument as stated was extremely terse but it relied on three beautiful facts, two of which I hadn’t known.  So, let me expand on it here.
First, a real number has an eventually periodic continued fraction iff it is a
quadratic surd
, i.e. it’s of the form
with
If
is of this form, we define
to be its
Galois conjugate
:
Second, there’s a beautiful theorem of Galois (1828): if
has a purely periodic continued fraction
then so does the reciprocal of its Galois conjugate!  In fact
We will need this consequence:
Third, take our quadratic surd
and write it as an eventually periodic continued fraction, say
Then Perron gave a cool formula for the Lagrange number
of
Namely,
is the max over
of
Here we are taking the periodic part of the continued fraction of
cyclically permuting it by
steps, and using the result to form ‘forwards’ and ‘backwards’ continued fractions, which we then sum up!  Wild!
Note that the backwards one is not purely periodic: it starts with a zero.
It’s pretty easy to see that the forwards continued fraction, say
can be written as
for
Thus by Galois’ result the backwards continued fraction is minus the Galois conjugate of the forwards one!  Here’s why:
It follows that
Thus the Lagrange number of
is a rational multiple of
since by Perron’s cool formula we have
Conclusion:
If
is a quadratic surd, the Lagrange number of
is a rational multiple of
But Freiman’s constant
is not a rational multiple of
.   So it can’t be the Lagrange number of any quadratic surd!
Reply
You can use Markdown or HTML in your comments.  You can also use LaTeX, like this: $latex E = m c^2 $. The word 'latex' comes right after the first dollar sign, with a space after it.
Cancel reply
Your email address will not be published.
Required fields are marked
*
Comment
*
Name
*
Email
*
Website
Notify me of new comments via email.
Notify me of new posts via email.
Δ