 Notices of the American Mathematical Society 
 Welcome to the Notices of the American Mathematical Society . With support from AMS membership , we are pleased to share the journal with the global mathematical community. 

 PDFLINK 

 AMS Communication 
 A Day of Advocacy on Capitol Hill—293 Mathematicians Take 274 Meetings Elaine Beebe 

 The timing couldn’t have been better for #MathSciOnTheHill, an advocacy event—on Thursday, January 8—where 293 mathematical scientists converged on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC. They came from 47 states and 176 districts to visit congressional representatives and senators and staffers. In one day, they took 274 meetings. The mission: make the case for deep and long-term investment in mathematics and science. 
 On the same day, Congress passed a package of appropriations bills rejecting President Trump’s proposed steep budget cuts to the National Science Foundation (NSF). 
 The group represented 12 national organizations, including the American Mathematical Society (AMS); most had traveled to DC that week for the 2026 Joint Mathematics Meetings. “Working together with the partner societies really helps amplify our messaging to Congress,” said Karen Saxe, senior vice president, AMS Government Relations—it helps to reinforce that mathematics research and education require robust congressional funding. 
 Figure 1 . Before meeting their members of Congress, 293 mathematicians gathered at Union Square on the west side of the US Capitol in Washington, DC. 
 “I was truly inspired by the advocates on the Hill,” said Tyler Kloefkorn, associate vice president, AMS Office of Government Relations. “This group—of students, teachers, educators, researchers, business-owners—went to great lengths to prepare and visit offices. For the vast majority of advocates, this was their first time on Capitol Hill.” 

 1 . Mathematics Makes Connections 

 The night before the Hill visit, the group gathered in a large hotel meeting room for training and orientation. Upon arrival, each participant received a striped #MathSciOnTheHill scarf to wear on the Hill. “Like being hooded,” someone quipped upon having a scarf ceremoniously flung around their neck by AMS President Ravi Vakil. 
 Figure 2 . AMS President Ravi Vakil (right) hands out scarves at the Hill visit training session. 
 The scarves made the group visible the next day on the Hill. “It was absolutely tremendous to frequently see colleagues from the mathematics community as we were walking the halls of Congress,” said AMS CEO John Meier. 
 “What do the scarfs mean?” asked a Hill staffer on an elevator. 
 “Mathematical sciences,” was the reply. 
 “Oh, cool!” 
 Equipped with a sample script and a folder of leave-behind materials—including a “Mathematics Makes Connections” poster and several informative one-pagers—the advocates, grouped by state, attended scheduled meetings. 
 In one of Meier’s visits, he partnered with a high school teacher and a tenured faculty member in a meeting with Representative Mike Simpson of Idaho and a staff member. Their conversation ranged from quality K–12 math education to support for foundational research to applications of mathematics. “We even got into quantum cryptography,” said Meier. 
 The group from Texas numbered 27; en masse they met with staffers in the offices of Senator John Cornyn and Senator Ted Cruz. Linda Antinone, a Fort Worth educator and president of the Council of Presidential Awardees in Mathematics, led the Texas contingent, organizing the presentation plan. “We chose several people to discuss issues from NSF mathematics funding, mathematics education, areas of applied mathematics, and how AI is opening new opportunities in all of these areas,” Antinone said. 
 After the Senate visits, the Texans organized themselves by congressional district into groups of four or five. “My team was diverse in age, career, and mathematical interests,” Antinone said: a high school teacher, a college professor, a PhD candidate, and a recent mathematics undergraduate. 
 When they entered Representative Jasmine Crockett’s office, Antinone took a photo with a cardboard cutout of the congresswoman and mentioned how thrilled her daughter would be. The staffer added, “She’ll be even more excited when she learns you’re about to meet the congresswoman and take a picture together!” Antinone recalled: “We walked through the tunnels to the Capitol, passing several other representatives along the way. Crockett spent about 15 minutes with us in a hallway, where we talked about math, education, and her background. She was very approachable and expressed her willingness to support us however she could.” 
 Figure 3 . Linda Antinone, Sasha Gonzalez, Rep. Jasmine Crockett, Ashley Alfred, Crystal Kalinec-Craig. 
 Another group member, Crystal Kalinec-Craig, a University of Texas San Antonio professor, observed that Crockett was especially interested in the younger advocates. “She really engaged with them,” Kalinec-Craig said. After the meeting, the group checked in with those junior members: Sasha Gonzalez, a recent mathematics undergraduate, at Texas State University, San Marcos; and Ashley Alfred, PhD candidate, University of Texas at Arlington. Both bubbled with reflections on the experience of meeting a member of Congress who was genuinely interested in what they thought and what they were concerned about. Gonzalez summed up: “It was real.” 

 2 . Cause for Celebration 

 While the #MathSciOnTheHill advocates represented a range of mathematical interests and issues, they at once conveyed a united message—and a message resoundingly well received. 
 “It reminds me that this is the people’s house,” said Fatima Akinola, a University of Florida graduate student. 
 “Everyone we met with was incredibly receptive to our message,” said Melody Molander, an assistant professor at the Ohio State University. 
 When meeting with Tyler Jones, legislative assistant to Senator Jon Husted, each member of the Ohio team offered a personal anecdote about how NSF funding has positively impacted them as well as the state of Ohio. “We also mentioned to Tyler that we would love to see more funding for undergraduate research through NSF, as this funding has been significantly cut,” Molander said. “Tyler agreed with us and told us he would look into the numbers more and bring this concern that he thought was also concerning to the Senator.” 
 Molander’s group was not scheduled to meet with Representative Mike Carey; they met with a staffer outside his office. But as it happened, Carey rushed out to vote on the funding package in Congress and noticed the group. “He quickly had us introduce ourselves and say what we were advocating for—NSF funding—and he mentioned that he would be voting in support of this bill, and that he has been an advocate for STEM research funding.” 
 That afternoon, the funding package passed in the House with strong bipartisan support. Subsequently, it passed by a large margin in the Senate; and on January 23, President Trump signed it into law, thereby allotting $8.75 billion in funding for the NSF. This amounted to a 3% cut from 2025. “It is hard to believe this is cause for celebration, but it is!” said Saxe—she noted that Trump had requested a 57% cut for the NSF. 
 “Engaging so many mathematicians in this effort, to see that congressional members are there, working hard every day to help their constituents, are not just the famous ones you see on the news, and can in fact be very down-to-earth, is one goal of the AMS Office of Government Relations,” Saxe said. 
 “The AMS provides many avenues for engagement,” said Meier, “but this Hill Day was something extraordinary. It was a collaborative effort with organizations from across the mathematical sciences all working together to make visible the importance of mathematics.” 
 #MathSciOnTheHill was a resonating success, Kloefkorn said, “because so many organizations and communities came together, supported one another, and communicated shared values and needs.” 
 He added: “Let’s do this again every year!” 
 Figure 4 . The AMS’s Tyler Kloefkorn and John Meier on the Capitol Hill subway system after meeting with Representative Jim Himes of Connecticut. 

 Elaine Beebe is a communications specialist at the American Mathematical Society. Her email address is [email protected] . Article DOI: 10.1090/noti3335 Credits 

 Figure 1 is courtesy of EPNAC.com. 
