Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                                       № 5/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                        The 4-Sample Theorem
                           on planar graphs


                       Car los Améndola • Thomas K a h l e



       The famous 4-Color Theorem from graph theory states
       that the vertices of any planar graph can be colored
       with four colors, so that no neighboring vertices have
       the same color. The 4-Sample Theorem from alge-
       braic statistics says that the maximum likelihood
       estimator for a Gaussian graphical model of a planar
       graph exists with probability 1 if one has at least
       four samples. This number of necessary samples, the
       maximum likelihood threshold, is a new graph invari-
       ant from algebraic statistics and connected not only
       to parameter estimation, but also to matrix comple-
       tion, the theory of filling partial matrices, and rigidity
       theory, which deals with stability of objects.

1 T h e 4-Sample Theorem

Statistics and algebra look back on a long joint history, maybe starting with
Pearson’s algebraic analysis of the distribution of crabs in the Bay of Naples. 1
In the 21st century, algebraic statistics is both an exciting branch of statistics [10]
and a vibrant community that continuously uncovers new connections between

1 Pearson analyzed the ratio of forehead breadth and body length of the crabs and employed

algebraic methods in order to find some statistical parameters. [8]


                                            1
data science and algebraic, geometric, and discrete structures in mathematics.
Here we want to tell one such story, namely how the theory of estimation for
“multivariate normal distributions”, through topics like matrix completion and
rigidity theory, is connected to basic invariants of graphs.
   Graphs are mathematical objects that formalize the idea of elements of a set
being pairwise related. Consider, for example, the public transportation map
in your town: you have a collection of stops (the vertices), and two stops are
connected (there is an edge between them) if a route links them. Graphs are
visualized by diagrams like this:




Formally, a graph G = (V, E) consists of a set of vertices V and a set of edges
E as in the picture. We only consider finite graphs. Thus, our set of vertices
is always a finite set V = {1, . . . , m} for some m ∈ N. If there is an edge
between two vertices i, j ∈ V , we write (i, j) ∈ E. In this snapshot we are
mostly interested in planar graphs, that is, graphs that can be drawn in the
plane so that no two edges cross.
   In what follows, we explore “Gaussian graphical models” – statistical models
that use graphs to capture the dependencies between Gaussian random vari-
ables. Our main goal is to establish the 4-Sample Theorem, which contains
the surprising insight, that a finite number of samples typically suffices for
the parameters of the model to be “estimable”. Our path towards proving
this theorem takes us from multivariate statistics all the way to the theory of
rigid polyhedra. The (very convincing) name of this theorem was suggested by
Steffen Lauritzen during the 2022 Oberwolfach Workshop Algebraic Structures
in Statistical Methodology.
   In Gaussian graphical models, the number of vertices of the graph G corre-
sponds to the number of Gaussian random variables (which we call covariates).
One exciting consequence of the theorem is that the number of required samples
does not depend on the number of covariates. This is important in biological
applications and machine learning, which both feature a very large number of
variables and very few samples.


2 Gaussian graphical models

Consider a random vector X = (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xm ), which has m random variables
as components, with a multivariate normal distribution. Multivariate normal
distributions generalize normal distributions to higher dimensions. A normally


                                        2
distributed random variable takes values in R and is determined by its mean and
variance: its values concentrate around the mean, while the variance quantifies
how widely the values are spread. In the multivariate case, this means that
the probability that X takes values in a subset of Rm is determined by a mean
vector µ ∈ Rm and a covariance matrix Σ ∈ Rm×m , which is symmetric 2 and
positive definite 3 (PD). Analogously to the one-dimensional normal distribution,
the mean vector specifies the center of the multivariate normal distribution. The
covariance matrix describes the variation of a multivariate normal distribution
in the different directions. To simplify matters, we can assume here that each
of our variables is centered, so that µ = 0 in what follows and the distribution
is completely determined by Σ ∈ PDm . 4
    We receive n samples of X and wish to estimate the distribution of X. Here
we should think of m as being large compared to the sample size n. Such an
estimation is most often based on model assumptions. This means that we
assume certain rules to hold, which could for example be empirically observed.
An extensively used class of models is the class of Gaussian graphical models.
There, we use graphs G = (V, E) on the vertex set V = {1, 2, . . . , m} and we
assume that each vertex corresponds to one component of the random vector X.
Intuitively, an edge in G should represent dependence of the corresponding
components of X. Here we mean dependence in the sense of probability theory:
one random variable depends on the other if the value it takes correlates to the
value the other one takes.
    The Gaussian graphical model associated to G is the set of all multivariate
normal distributions whose covariance matrices lie in the set

                   M(G) = Σ ∈ PDm : Σ−1
                         
                                     ij = 0 for (i, j) ∈
                                                       /E .

In other words, we say that a covariance matrix belongs to the model if its
inverse has a 0 in the entry (i, j) whenever there is no edge between i and j
in G. 5 For example, consider G = C4 to be the 4-cycle below:

                                          1       2

                                          4       3

2  A matrix is called symmetric if its entries are symmetric with respect to the diagonal.
3  Geometrically, positive definiteness means that a matrix does not flip a vector across
the origin when applied. For our covariance matrix this means that the components of the
random vector correlate “smoothly” without any flips.
 4 Positive definite matrices of size m × m.
 5 This condition is natural because it is equivalent to the statement that X is “conditionally
                                                                             i
independent” of Xj given the rest of the components of the Gaussian vector X.


                                              3
Then,
                                                          ∗ ∗ 0 ∗ 
                                                 −1         ∗∗∗ 0
                     M(C4 ) =        Σ ∈ PD4 : Σ      =     0 ∗∗∗        .
                                                            ∗ 0 ∗∗



3 Estimating the graph from data

In practical applications, the graph G is often unknown. The estimation would
then proceed in two steps. First, a graph G is estimated. 6 Then, maximum
likelihood estimation 7 for the graphical model M(G) is performed based on
that graph. The goal of maximum likelihood estimation is to estimate the
unknown parameters of a model in a way that makes the observed data most
likely. In our case, we assume the data follows a multivariate normal distribution,
with the unknown parameters being the mean vector and the covariance matrix.
Therefore, the objective is to estimate these parameters such that the observed
data vectors are most likely to occur under the assumed distribution. This
optimization problem comes with its own difficulties, which we will not delve
into here. Notice, however, that a maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) might
not exist. Its existence is one of the central problems addressed in this snapshot.
    A concrete example of this approach is in [12]. The authors consider a
climate network grid with 2562 nodes (variables) and they have 756 samples,
which are real vectors of length 2562. They want to estimate both the graph
structure and the parameters of the corresponding Gaussian graphical model.
They employ the graphical LASSO, and they find that the MLE does exist.
    The results in this snapshot explain why and how the existence of the MLE is
connected to the structure of the graph. As always in mathematics, it is useful
to first give a name to the thing one wants to study. Algebraic statisticians have
coined the term maximum likelihood threshold (MLT) for the number of samples
that is necessary to have an MLE with probability 1. Interestingly, this number
is independent of the concrete data (up to events of probability 0). An even
more interesting fact is that this number only depends on certain graph-theoretic
invariants and thus becomes independent of the concrete number of covariates,
as long as the graph structure does not change too much. For example, in any
square grid every vertex has exactly four neighbors, independently of its size.
The fact that the MLT does not grow as the number of covariates grows, gives
an advantage over classical results in statistics that do not consider the graph
structure. One such classical result is that, if the number of samples exceeds

6  A common method for this step is the “graphical LASSO” [6].
7  We will not go into the details of maximum likelihood estimation here. It is arguably the
most common estimation method in parametric statistics and also featured in Snapshot 1/2018
by Anna Seigal [9].


                                             4
the number of covariates, then the MLE exists with probability 1. 8
    The input for algorithms which we use to approximate the covariance matrix
is the empirical covariance matrix S. This is an approximation to the covariance
matrix computed from the vector-valued observations. This matrix need not be
positive definite (like an actual covariance matrix). In fact, if the number of
samples is less than the number of covariates, it can never be positive definite.
In such cases we have the following completion theorem [5, Theorem 2.1]: the
MLE exists with probability 1 in M(G) if and only if the empirical covariance
matrix S restricted to the diagonal entries and those corresponding to edges
of G has a PD-completion. Here, the PD-completion is a positive definite matrix
that has the same entries like S on the diagonal and in those positions whose
index pair (i, j) corresponds to an edge in the graph G. If the number of samples
exceeds the number of variables, the empirical covariance matrix itself is PD.
    To illustrate the PD-completion, consider the small 2 × 3 grid below. The
six vertices mean that we deal with a 6 × 6-completion problem.

                                            1       2       3

                                            4       5       6

As it turns out, for any graphical model of a rectangular grid, four samples
suffice for the MLE to exist with probability 1, no matter the size of the grid.
Consider the following partial matrices, where each could be the empirical
covariance matrix of some given data:
                     6   1       −2                      6   1       −2        
                      1   4   2         3                   1   4   2         3
                   −2    2   2            3            −2    2   2            3
                                   5    1                                5    1
                          3        1    5 −5                    3        1    5 −5
                              3        −5 10                        3        −5 5

The entries that are left out correspond exactly to the non-edges of the grid. To
find a PD-completion means filling in these entries so that the resulting matrix
is positive definite. Whether this is possible can depend subtly on the matrix.
Indeed, even though they differ only on their last entry, the matrix on the left
has a PD-completion, while the matrix on the right does not. The advanced
reader might try to verify this claim.
   The key insight is that generically, we are always in the situation that the
completion exists, once the empirical covariance matrix has been computed
from enough samples. The sporadic cases for which this is not true happen
with probability 0 and arise, for example, if by chance all samples would be
exactly equal. However, for many modern applications, for example in biology,

8   This goes back to the theory of “exponential families” of Barndorff-Nielsen and Dempster.


                                                    5
the number of variables m is very large, and gathering samples is very expensive.
It is therefore natural to ask for MLE existence results that are independent of
the number of samples. That such bounds exist and that they are connected
to graph theory became clear already in the 1990s in [5], but only recently,
through the connection to and renewed interest in matrix completion, several
breakthroughs have been possible. In particular, the matrix completion problem
has been connected to “rigidity theory” of graphs in the work of Bernstein,
Gross, Sullivant, and others [4, 3, 7].


4 The maximum likelihood threshold

As explained above, the maximum likelihood threshold of a graph G is the least
number of samples required so that the maximum likelihood estimate in the
Gaussian graphical model associated to the graph G exists with probability 1.
We denote this number by mlt(G). The definition of mlt is attractive because
it is a graph invariant – mlt(G) is a specific number that only depends on the
structure of the graph G. There is no general method known to compute mlt(G)
from G. So far the community has focused on providing bounds.
    From the completion theorem we can see that mlt(G) is bounded by the
number of vertices of G: if the number of samples exceeds the number of
variables, the empirical covariance matrix is PD with probability 1 and therefore
the MLE exists with probability 1. This bound is achieved for the complete
graph Km , which is the graph containing every possible edge on m vertices:
mlt(Km ) = m. For applications such as the ones outlined above, it is desirable
to bound mlt(G) independently of the number of vertices, or in terms of graph
invariants.
    The algebraic statistics community got interested in this problem around 2008,
when Steffen Lauritzen posted the benchmark problem of understanding the
maximum likelihood threshold for the 3×3-grid, see [11]. Improved combinatorial
bounds have been achieved by transforming the problem again, this time to a
geometric problem! The question of determining mlt(G) can be formulated as
a question about geometric structures made of rigid bars connected at freely
rotating joints. This is rigidity theory. We come back to it in Section 6 after
talking about planar graphs, which are crucial for the 4-Sample Theorem.


5 Planar graphs

The first reduction in the proof of the 4-Sample Theorem arises from considering
only maximal planar graphs. These are planar graphs, such that adding any
further edge makes them non-planar. To every planar graph, one can add edges
until it is a maximal planar graph. It can be checked that the number of edges


                                        6
of a maximal planar graph with m vertices is 3m − 6. If G is maximal planar,
then all regions arising when drawing the graph have exactly three sides. This
also applies to the unbounded outside region. Additionally, any maximal planar
graph is 3-connected, meaning that it stays connected 9 after removing two or
fewer vertices. An interesting maximal planar graph is the Goldner–Harary
graph in Figure 1.




Figure 1 : The Goldner–Harary graph is a maximal planar graph on 11 vertices
            with 27 = 3 · 11 − 6 edges.

   Let us now finally formulate the 4-Sample Theorem precisely:

Theorem (4-Sample Theorem, [7, Corollary 3.11]). Let G be a planar graph.
If there are at least four samples from a distribution in the Gaussian graphical
model of G, the maximum likelihood estimator exists with probability 1.

    To prove the 4-Sample Theorem, we can assume that G is maximal planar:
Adding edges to a planar graph in order to obtain a maximal planar graph
corresponds to prescribing more non-0s for the matrices belonging to the
Gaussian graphical model associated to the graph. Therefore, a PD-completion
of the empirical covariance matrix that belongs to the model associated to the
maximal planar graph also belongs to the model associated to the actual graph.
Hence, if the MLE exists with probability 1 for the maximal planar graph, then
it also exists with probability 1 for the actual graph.


6 G raphs and framewor ks

Our goal below is to reduce the 4-Sample Theorem to another breakthrough
theorem of two algebraic statisticians: Elizabeth Gross and Seth Sullivant.
Their result below is about frameworks, which are embeddings of the vertices
(and thus the entire graph) into a space where one can then argue about angles
and lengths. To be more precise, a framework in Rd is a pair (G, p) where G is

9 A graph is called connected if you can start at any vertex and reach any other vertex by

following edges.


                                            7
a graph with m vertices and p is a collection of m points p1 , . . . , pm ∈ Rd . Two
frameworks (G, p) and (G, q) for the same graph are called equivalent if for each
edge (i, j) ∈ E the distance between the points i and j agrees. Equivalence is a
somewhat weaker notion than that of congruence. Two frameworks are called
congruent if one can be transformed into the other without changing distances
and angles.
   To formulate rigidity of frameworks, one considers continuous changes to
the points p1 , . . . , pm so that all frameworks along the continuous deformation
are equivalent. That is, one moves the points around in space such that the
distances stay the same. A framework is called rigid if any two equivalent
frameworks arising from such a continuous deformation are congruent. For
example, a triangle is rigid but a square is not, as seen in Figure 2.




Figu r e 2 : Two equivalent frameworks of the 4-cycle in R2 that are not congruent.


    Let us also consider the following complementary property. A framework is
called independent if for any choice of an edge and any sufficiently small ε > 0,
there exists a framework for the same graph but such that the chosen edge has
its length modified by ε while all other lengths stay the same. A graph G is
called d-independent if d is the minimal dimension for which an independent
framework for the graph G exists. For example, the 4-cycle is 2-independent
because it can be embedded in the plane as an independent framework, albeit
not rigidly. Any edge can be made a little shorter or longer, while keeping the
combinatorics and the other edge lengths (just the angles would change). 10
The diamond graph, see Figure 3, with one added edge is still 2-independent,
but the complete graph is not. 11 The intuition is that a framework is more
rigid if it has more edges and more independent if it has fewer edges.
    While it is conceivable that the rigidity of a framework for a given graph
could depend on the concrete framework chosen, this is not the case. It has been
known since the 1970s [2] that for a fixed graph and a fixed dimension d, either
almost all d-dimensional frameworks for that graph are rigid, or almost all are
not rigid. This means that the rigidity of a framework is determined entirely
by its graph, so we can treat rigidity of a framework as a property of its graph.

10 Of course, one also needs to check that the square cannot be embedded as an independent

framework in R.
11 Stop for a moment and figure out why the complete graph is not 2-independent.




                                            8
      Fi g u r e 3 : The 4-cycle, the diamond graph and the complete graph.


Independence of frameworks, on the contrary, is not directly a graph property.
For every graph G with m vertices there indeed does exist an independent
framework with that graph. Choose, for example, the framework in Rm such
that each edge corresponds to one of the m directions of Rm . Nevertheless,
d-independence is indeed a property of the graph and not of the framework.
Thus, the diamond graph is rigid and 2-independent.
    We can now formulate [7, Theorem 1.2] from Gross and Sullivant in the
following way. If a graph G is (n − 1)-independent, then mlt(G) ≤ n. Therefore,
if we show that any (maximal) planar graph can be realized by an independent
framework in the 3-dimensional space, we are able to conclude the 4-Sample
Theorem. This is what we aim for in the next section.


7 P r oof of the 4-Sample Theorem

Let G be a maximal planar graph. The celebrated Steinitz’s Theorem 12 from
1916 says that the graphs formed by the vertices and edges of polyhedra are
precisely the finite 3-connected planar graphs. Consequently, since G is 3-
connected, there exists a polyhedron which corresponds to our graph G. Of
course, we now view the vertices of this polyhedron as a framework in R3 , but
is it rigid? At this point, we employ a theorem of Cauchy 13 which originated
in Euclid’s “Elements” and has a proof from “THE BOOK” [1, Chapter 14]. 14
Cauchy’s Theorem says that if two convex polyhedra have the same graph
according to Steinitz’s Theorem and if further under this correspondence of
graphs, all facets are pairwise congruent (as 2-dimensional convex polygons),
then the 3-dimensional convex polyhedra are themselves congruent. In particular,
the framework is rigid. 15

12  Ernst Steinitz (1871–1928) was a German mathematician who made fundamental contri-
butions to modern algebra.
 13 Augustin Louis Cauchy (1789–1859) was a French mathematician who made significant

contributions to the burgeoning field of analysis.
 14 At least after Steinitz, Schoenberg, and Aleksandrov ironed out all the issues in Cauchy’s

proof of the main lemma.
 15 In the world of non-convex polyhedra there also exist “flexible” polyhedra which have an

interesting history too.


                                              9
    This can be illustrated by a fun experiment: construct a graph of a 3-
dimensional polytope from pieces of maccheroni (that is, rigid tubes) and
connect the edges flexibly, for example by running a thread through all edges.
A cube built like this falls flat (it is not rigid), but a tetrahedron does not (it is
rigid).
    Back in the proof, since maximal planar graphs subdivide the plane into
triangles, our polyhedron associated to the graph G is a simplicial polytope – all
of its faces are triangles. By the SSS-Theorem 16 , each face is rigid. Hence, since
the congruence of faces is guaranteed, Cauchy’s Theorem can be applied. Thus,
we have produced a rigid framework from the polyhedron that we obtained
from the maximal planar graph G. In R3 , the minimal number of edges of a
rigid framework turns out to be 3m − 6. By this minimality, our framework
is rigid and independent, and hence G is 3-independent. Therefore, we have
achieved mlt(G) ≤ 4. This means that the MLE of the Gaussian graphical
model associated to any planar graph exists with probability 1 as soon as we
have at least four samples, which is precisely the 4-Sample Theorem.


8 Conclusion, questions, outlook

Graphical models associated to planar graphs are very important in spatial
statistics. The 4-Sample Theorem tells us that only a small, constant number
of samples is needed for consistent estimation in these models. Nevertheless,
in some applications, it might still be too much to ask for the MLE to exist
with probability 1. In such a situation, a positive probability for the MLE to
exist would suffice. This is captured by the weak maximum likelihood threshold.
For example, the weak MLT of any square-grid graph, such as the one in the
example on page 5, is 2, although the MLT is 3.
   The bound in the 4-Sample Theorem is sharp, and there exist examples of
planar graphs for all values of the MLT. A graph G with no edges satisfies
mlt(G) = 1. Any tree 17 T has mlt(T ) = 2, the 4-cycle C4 has mlt(C4 ) = 3 and
finally, the complete graph on four vertices K4 satisfies mlt(K4 ) = 4.
   As always, the mathematical story continues. Matroid theory is a crucial tool
to express and generalize the notions of independence in the proof. It is widely
recognized as the right language to talk about rigidity and the MLT as a graph
invariant. See [4] for recent bounds on mlt(G) in terms of rigidity-theoretic
properties of G. This connection is actively being developed in algebraic
statistics.
16 The Side-Side-Side Theorem states that two triangles with equal corresponding side lengths

must be congruent.
17 A tree is a graph where any two vertices are connected by exactly one path of edges.




                                             10
R e f e rences

 [1] M. Aigner and G. M. Ziegler, Proofs from THE BOOK, 6th ed., Springer,
     2018.
 [2] L. Asimow and B. Roth, The rigidity of graphs, Transactions of the Ameri-
     can Mathematical Society 245 (1978), 279–289.
 [3] D. I. Bernstein, S. Dewar, S. J. Gortler, A. Nixon, M. Sitharam, and
     L. Theran, Computing maximum likelihood thresholds using graph rigidity,
     Algebraic Statistics 14 (2023), no. 2, 287–305.
 [4]          , Maximum likelihood thresholds via graph rigidity, The Annals of
       Applied Probability 34 (2024), no. 3, 3288–3319.

 [5] S. L. Buhl, On the existence of maximum likelihood estimators for graphical
     Gaussian models, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 20 (1993), no. 3,
     263–270.
 [6] J. Friedman, T. Hastie, and R. Tibshirani, Sparse inverse covariance
     estimation with the graphical lasso, Biostatistics 9 (2008), no. 3, 432–441.

 [7] E. Gross and S. Sullivant, The maximum likelihood threshold of a graph,
     Bernoulli 24 (2018), no. 1, 386–407.
 [8] K. Pearson, Contributions to the mathematical theory of evolution, Philo-
     sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (1894), no. 185.

 [9] A. Seigal, The algebraic statistics of an Oberwolfach workshop, Snapshots
     of Modern Mathematics from Oberwolfach (2018), no. 01, https://doi.org/
     10.14760/SNAP-2018-001-EN.
[10] S. Sullivant, Algebraic statistics, Graduate Studies in Mathematics, vol.
     194, American Mathematical Society, 2018.

[11] C. Uhler, Geometry of maximum likelihood estimation in Gaussian graphical
     models, The Annals of Statistics 40 (2012), no. 1, 238–261.
[12] T. Zerenner, P. Friederichs, K. Lehnertz, and A. Hense, A Gaussian
     graphical model approach to climate networks, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary
     Journal of Nonlinear Science 24 (2014), no. 2.




                                       11
Car lo s A m é n d o l a i s a professor of           Mathema t i c a l s u b j e c t s
algeb ra i c a n d g e o m e tr ic methods in data    Discrete M a t h e m a t i c s a n d Fo u n d a t i o n s,
analysis at the institute of mathematics of           Probabil i t y T h e o r y a n d S t a t i s t i c s
the Te c h n i c a l U n i ve r sity of Ber lin.
                                                      License
Thom a s K a h l e wo r k s at                        Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0
Otto- vo n - G u e r i cke U niversity in
Magdeburg, Ger many on topics of algebra              DOI
and c o m b i n a t o r i c s w ith applications to   10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 5 - E N
statis t i c s. H e i s a c t i ve in the
popu l a r i z a t i o n o f m athematics for
exam p l e o n S o c i a l M edia or through his
Podc a s t E i g e n ra u m .




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r s                                 Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Victo r B l o c h , E l i s a b e th aus dem Siepen   Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de                    Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                                      77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                                   Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e                     Director
                                                      Gerhard H u i s ke n
