Snapsho t s o f m o d e r n m athematics                                 № 2/2026
from Ob e r wo l f a c h




                        S ecure file shar ing and
                             Cayley graphs


                                     Eilidh McKemmie




       Have you ever wondered how your computer knows
       it can trust certain downloads but not others? This
       snapshot describes some security concerns and one
       algebraic way of dealing with them. We’ll see an
       interesting procedure that uses a very difficult problem
       in algebra to provide security, and discuss some of the
       procedure’s important properties.

1 F i l e shar ing

Imagine you are trying to download a large file from the internet but your
enemy, Eve, is determined to ruin your fun. Since the file is large, it is split
up into multiple different parts called packets. This situation is common with
peer-to-peer file sharing. If Eve can tamper with some of the packets she can
ruin the whole file, or even insert a virus. You’d like to find this out before you
put the packets together and open the corrupted file.
   You might use something called a hash function which assigns to any possible
packet a short digital fingerprint called a hash. You’d be sent the hash of each
packet through a separate channel. Then you just apply the hash function to
the packet and check if it’s the same as the claimed hash for that packet. If the
actual hash is different from the claimed hash, you know that packet has been
tampered with and you discard it before trying to download it again.
   We’re going to use mathematics to create a hash function which has nice
properties for file sharing.


                                            1
2 Desirable proper ties

We’re going to assume that Eve can mess with the packets but not with the
hashes. If the hashes are much smaller than the packets, this means we can use
a secure channel which can handle only a small amount of data. Then the small
hashes fit through the secure channel, while the big packets do not.
    Unfortunately this introduces another problem: there will be far more possible
packets than possible hashes, so a hash will not be unique to the packet. That
means Eve could find another bogus packet with the correct hash and mess
with your file anyway. Therefore you want your hash function to be pre-image
resistant, which means that it is very difficult for Eve to compute a packet
which has a given hash.
    There are different ways to put the original file back together from the
downloaded packets, and in some situations we can do it by just multiplying
together some packets. Depending on what the packages actually are, multiply
can mean arithmetic multiplication, but also just appending all packages. For
example, fountain codes are used in peer-to-peer file sharing to break up the
file into packets so that you can reassemble the original file even if you lost
a small number of packets [6]. If the hashes of the packets can be multiplied
together to get the hash of the file, we can compute hashes a lot more quickly by
hashing packages simultaneously, and then multiplying them together. When
the product of hashes is the hash of the product of packets, the hash function
is called homomorphic.
    Using a homomorphic hash function means that we only need the hash of the
whole file to be sent over our secure channel. We don’t have to go through the
trouble of constructing the file before checking if it was tampered with. Instead,
we can hash each packet as it arrives and then take the product at the end and
compare to the expected hash of the file.
    So far, we have identified that our objective is to find a function mapping
packets to hashes with the following properties:
1.   Compression: the hash is much smaller than the packet.
2.   Homomorphism: the hash of a product should be the product of hashes.
3.   Pre-image resistance: it should be very difficult for Eve to find a packet
     with a given hash.
  One potential issue is that Eve could insert a packet whose hash is just 1,
which would not change the product of hashes but would change the file.
Therefore we will also ask that our hash is collision resistant:

4.   Collision resistance: it should be very difficult for Eve to find a packet whose
     hash is 1. This turns out to be the same as finding two different packets
     with the same hash.


                                          2
   So we are looking for a hash function which compresses, is a homomorphism,
and is pre-image and collision resistant. We will see how to create such a hash
function using matrix multiplication.


3 M atr ix multiplication

When one number is not enough information, you might use a matrix which
is an array of numbers. Here are some examples of matrices whose entries are
integers (whole numbers):
                                
                       1    2   3                       
                      4             1       0   2   1   0
                            5   6 ,               ,         .
                                     2       0   0   0   1
                       7    8   9

Matrices are useful tools in many areas of mathematics and the sciences, for
further reading on matrices, see Snapshot 5/2019 [3].
    In particular, matrices are often used to hold data for data analysis or image
compression. For such applications, computers need to be able to efficiently
perform operations like multiplication and addition on matrices. We are going
to concentrate on multiplying n × n matrices, which are squares with n rows
and n columns. The first example above is a 3 × 3 matrix and the third is a 2 × 2
matrix. For a fixed number n, any two of these matrices can be multiplied
together, just like numbers can be multiplied. The multiplication of two n × n
matrices A and B works as follows: Each entry of the new matrix is a number
that is computed by multiplying the numbers in a row of A with the numbers in
the corresponding column of B one by one, matching them by their position, and
finally adding up all those products. Computers can do this very efficiently even
for large matrices. When you multiply two n × n matrices, you get another n × n
matrix, so the matrix doesn’t grow in size. This will be useful for achieving our
first goal of keeping the size of a hash small.
    Multiplying matrices has a lot of similarities to multiplying numbers. There
is even a matrix I which acts like the number 1 because when you multiply
another matrix A by I, you just get A again. The matrix I has the number 1
in every entry of the diagonal from the top left to the bottom right of the
matrix and all other entries are equal to 0. This is called the identity matrix.
Moreover, you can do something like division with some matrices: to “divide”
by a matrix A, you find the inverse A−1 of A and multiply by that. Note that
there are many matrices that do not have an inverse. These matrices are like
the number 0 because you cannot divide by them.
    Matrix multiplication is more complicated than multiplying numbers. For
example, we know that 2 · 3 = 6 = 3 · 2 but for matrices A and B we usually


                                         3
have AB ̸= BA (for matrix multiplication, we omit the product symbol). For
example
                                                     
        0 1     2 3       4 5             2 3     0 1       3 2
                      =           while                 =         .
        1 0     4 5       2 3             4 5     1 0       5 4

It turns out this will help us immensely when coming up with our hash function.
    One more thing before we create our hash function: we will actually be
taking our matrix entries modulo a prime p. This means that we will fix a prime
number p at the beginning, and then each entry in each matrix will be replaced
by its remainder when dividing by p. This will help to keep our hashes small,
since there are only p possibilities for each entry of the matrices. For example,
if p = 3 then 3 will be replaced by 0 and 4 will be replaced by 1, etc. It turns
out this does not mess with our multiplication. So the above example taken
modulo 3 will be
                                                           
           0 1     2 0          1 2           2 0      0 1        0 2
                            =           and                  =          .
           1 0     1 2          2 0           1 2      1 0        2 1

   The matrices that we will use for our hash function come from a special
set SLn (p) of n × n matrices modulo a prime number p which have inverses. In
our example, the matrices are from SL2 (3).


4 Cayley hash functions

To create a Cayley hash function, you need to pick two matrices and call them A
and B, making sure that AB ̸= BA. As an example, let’s use the matrices
                                                   
                               1 1                1 0
                        A=            and B =
                               0 1                1 1

in SL2 (3), which Gilles Zémor used when he proposed one of the first Cayley
hash functions [11].
   A packet is a sequence of 0s and 1s of any length. The function then replaces
each 1 with a B and each 0 with an A. The hash is then the product of all
those matrices in order. We’ll call this function h. For example, using Zémor’s
choice of A and B gives us
                                                           
                                                        2 0
                  h(010110001) = ABABBAAAB =                  .
                                                        1 2

   Since we are using p = 3, this function always outputs a 2 × 2 matrix with
entries 0, 1 or 2. In fact, there are only 24 matrices in SL2 (3), which means


                                       4
there are only 24 possible hashes. If we label them by numbers from 1 to 24
and use this label as the final hash, our hash is at most two digits long (or 4
bits if we’re using 0s and 1s), no matter how large the packet is. We now have
a hash function which has our first desired property: the hash is much smaller
than the packet.
   We also have our second property: the hash is homomorphic. This is because
multiplying the packets just means to append them, for example,

                   h(010)h(110) = ABABBA = h(010110).

   Notice that in general we cannot rearrange the letters in our packet without
changing the hash because AB ̸= BA. This hints that rearranging will not
break collision resistance. To understand pre-image and collision resistance
more deeply, we need to know why the hash functions are named after Cayley.


5 C ayley graphs

A Cayley graph is a visual way to see the pre-image and collision resistance
properties of Cayley hash functions. The mathematician Arthur Cayley (1821–
1895) was the first to describe these graphs in 1878 and Max Dehn (1878–1952)
developed a lot of the basic theory of Cayley graphs in the early 1900s. Cayley
graphs were developed to help us understand the mathematics of symmetry,
known as group theory. The Snapshot 16/2019 [7] discusses some interesting
properties of these graphs, some of which we will use later.
   We will concentrate only on the applications of Cayley graphs to understand
pre-image and collision resistance for Cayley hash functions. These two proper-
ties are much harder to achieve and much harder to verify than compression
and homomorphism, which is why we’ll need this extra tool.
   Given two matrices A, B in SLn (p) we define the Cayley graph to be a set of
dots, one for each matrix in SLn (p), with two dots M and N connected by an
arrow M → N in (apple) red if N = M A or in blue if N = M B. This means
that if you start with the identity matrix I, you can draw the entire graph by
“walking” from dot to dot, where each step is just multiplying by A or B on the
right. Figure 1 shows the Cayley graph for Zémor’s example of
                                                   
                               1 1                1 0
                        A=             and B =          .
                               0 1                1 1

The lines are labelled by colour with the As (apple) red and the Bs blue. The
identity matrix has a red dot so you can find it easily.
   You can see that the graph has a lot of repeating patterns but it is not
necessarily easy to navigate through. Notice, for example, the triangles that


                                      5
        F i g u r e 1 : The Cayley graph of SL2 (3) with Zémor’s A and B.


tell us that AAA = I = BBB. You can also use the graph to spot facts
like AAB = BAABA because the different paths reach the same endpoint.
    Now let’s think about what pre-image resistance means in terms of the
Cayley graph. Pre-image resistance means it is hard to find a packet with a
given hash. The hash of a packet is just the endpoint of the packet’s path
through the Cayley graph. Pre-image resistance can therefore be rewritten as
“it is very difficult to find a path in the Cayley graph from the identity I to a
given point”.
    Collision resistance means that it is hard to find a loop in the Cayley graph,
because a loop is essentially a packet whose hash is the identity. If you follow
the loop in the Cayley graph, you must end in the same matrix you started
with. That means, if you multiply exactly those matrices that constitute the
loop, you get the identity matrix. Another way to see this is that a loop shows


                                        6
two different ways of getting to the same place, which means you have two
different packets with the same hash.
    In our example, the Cayley graph is quite small. You can see that there
are loops with just three steps which means the hash is not collision resistant.
Additionally, you can walk from the identity to any matrix in at most five steps.
Therefore this example is not pre-image resistant: given a matrix M , Eve can
simply ask her computer to go through all the possible paths of length five and
check if M is at the end of the path. Even if she does not use any tricks to
make her work easier, she will only need to check 25 = 32 paths since there are
only two possible choices for multiplication in each of the five dots on the path.
    The way to get around this problem is to make p very large. You probably
want primes large enough to be used in other data security systems like RSA [4],
which means primes greater than 22048 ≈ 3.2 × 10616 . Then there will be too
many elements in SLn (p) and hence far too many paths to check and Eve
will need some mathematical tricks to have a chance of breaking pre-image
resistance.


6 C h oosing the r ight A and B

Until now we’ve swept the choice of A and B under the carpet. A Cayley hash
function always has the compression and homomorphism properties, but the
pre-image and collision resistance of our hash function rely on which A and B
we choose.
   It is generally considered hard to prove that a given problem is difficult for a
computer to solve. This means it is much easier to show that a hash function
is not pre-image or collision resistant than to show it is resistant. Because of
this, we will accept good evidence of pre-image or collision resistance in lieu of
a proof.
   Tillich and Zémor showed that the proposal described above is not collision
resistant [10]. Many other suggestions for A and B have also been broken. As
far as I know, there are two suggestions which are unbroken [2, 8]. The evidence
for pre-image and collision resistance of these proposals comes from girth and
freeness properties of the associated Cayley graph.


6.1 Gi r t h

There is a famous conjecture of Babai which says that you need at most
around log p steps to get between any two matrices in the Cayley graph, as
long as p is sufficiently large. For SLn (p) the conjecture was proven to be true
by [5, 1, 9].


                                        7
   To make sure that it is very difficult to break the collision and pre-image
resistance of our hash function, we’d need at least around log p steps to get
between any two matrices in the Cayley graph. This means that the girth of the
graph should be as large as possible. Formally, the girth of a Cayley graph is the
length of a shortest directed loop in the graph and hence exactly the parameter
we identified as important for collision resistance in the previous section.
   When we select A and B, we would like their Cayley graph to have large
girth. Note that this happens quite often, for example for many families of
expander graphs which you can read about in the Snapshot 16/2019 [7].

6.2 Fr e e n e s s

The reason we are taking remainders after dividing by p for the entries of the
matrix is to make sure the hashes stay small. What if you could forget about
the remainders and just work with the integers normally? This is called lifting
to the integers. If you get a violation of collision or pre-image resistance when
you lift your A and B to the integers then you’ve found a violation of collision
or pre-image resistance which works for every prime p, completely breaking the
hash function.
   Therefore, we’d like there to be no possible violations of collision or pre-image
resistance after A and B are lifted to the integers. If this is the case, we say
that A and B generate a free structure.
   The choices of A and B in [2, 8] generate free structures and their Cayley
graphs have large girth, which provides good evidence that the Cayley hash
functions are secure.


7 Unanswered questions

In this snapshot, we have seen that Cayley hash functions are promising can-
didates to provide security in file sharing. We have seen how the choice of
matrices A and B can affect the underlying Cayley graph which controls the
pre-image and collision resistance properties of our hash function. We under-
stood that choosing secure A and B is difficult, and that mathematicians have
some good evidence for certain choices to be safe based on girth and freeness.
   The question which remains unanswered is whether these girth and freeness
properties are enough to guarantee security. To show that the answer is no,
mathematicians would have to come up with an example of A and B with nice
girth and freeness properties but without pre-image and collision resistance. To
show that the answer is yes would be even harder because researchers will have
to consider every possible A and B and show that every possible algorithm to
find pre-images or collisions fails.


                                         8
I m a g e credits

Figure 1 Drawn using GeoGebra.


R e f e rences

 [1] E. Breuillard, B. Green, and T. Tao, Approximate subgroups of linear
     groups, Geometric and Functional Analysis 21 (2011), no. 4, 774–819.

 [2] L. Bromberg, V. Shpilrain, and A. Vdovina, Navigating in the Cayley graph
     of SL2 (Fp ) and applications to hashing, Semigroup Forum 94 (2015), no. 2,
     314–324.
 [3] A. Detinko, D. Flannery, and A. Hulpke, Algebra, matrices, and computers,
     Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach (2019), no. 05, https:
     //doi.org/10.14760/SNAP-2019-005-EN.
 [4] M. Gardner, Mathematical games, Scientific American 237 (1977), no. 2,
     120–125.
 [5] H. A. Helfgott, Growth and generation in SL2 (Z/pZ), Annals of Mathe-
     matics 167 (2008), no. 2, 601–623.
 [6] N. Johnson, Damn cool algorithms: Fountain codes, 2012, http://blog.
     notdot.net/2012/01/Damn-Cool-Algorithms-Fountain-Codes, visited on
     2025-28-11.
 [7] A. Khukhro, Expander graphs and where to find them, Snapshots of modern
     mathematics from Oberwolfach (2019), no. 16, https://doi.org/10.14760/
     SNAP-2019-016-EN.
 [8] C. Le Coz, C. Battarbee, R. Flores, T. Koberda, and D. Kahrobaei, Post-
     quantum hash functions using SLn (Fp ), Advances in Mathematics of Com-
     munications 19 (2025), no. 3, 996–1009.

 [9] L. Pyber and E. Szabó, Growth in finite simple groups of lie type, Journal
     of the American Mathematical Society 29 (2014), no. 1, 95–146.
[10] J. Tillich and G. Zémor, Group-theoretic hash functions, Algebraic Coding,
     Springer, 1994, pp. 90–110.

[11] G. Zémor, Hash functions and Cayley graphs, Designs, Codes and Cryp-
     tography 4 (1994), no. 3, 381–394.




                                       9
Eilidh M c Ke m m i e i s an assistant        Connect i o n s t o o t h e r f i e l d s
profe s s o r o f m a t h e m atics at Kean   Compute r S c i e n c e
Unive r s i t y.
                                              License
Math e m a t i c a l s u b j e c ts           Creative C o m m o n s B Y- S A 4 . 0
Algeb ra a n d N u m b e r Theor y
                                              DOI
                                              10.1476 0 / S N A P - 2 0 2 6 - 0 0 2 - E N




Snapshots of modern mathematics from Oberwolfach provide exciting insights into
current mathematical research. They are written by participants in the scientific
program of the Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach (MFO). The
snapshot project is designed to promote the understanding and appreciation of
modern mathematics and mathematical research in the interested public worldwide.
All snapshots are published in cooperation with the IMAGINARY platform and
can be found on www.imaginary.org/snapshots and on www.mfo.de/snapshots.

ISSN 2626 -1995


Junio r E d i t o r                           Mathema t i s c h e s Fo r s c h u n g s i n s t i t u t
Georg S c h i n d l i n g                     Oberwol f a c h g G m b H
junio r - ed i t o r s @ m f o. de            Schwarz wa l d s t r. 9 – 11
                                              77709 O b e r wo l f a c h
Senio r E d i t o r                           Ger many
Anja R a n d e cke r
senio r - ed i t o r @ m f o. d e             Director
                                              Gerhard H u i s ke n
