Well, thank you very much for inviting me. I'm sorry I couldn't come in person. Um this is some work that I've >> [clears throat] >> done with Paul Schwann at the Universidade Estadual de Campinas trying to build on work done by Ivan Todorov and Michel Dubois-Violette which who found a nice way of thinking about the standard model gauge group. I'd like to add here that I first met Ivan Todorov when I was a graduate student at MIT working under Irving Segal and I'm afraid I was too intimidated by both of them to really talk to Ivan Todorov at the time. Um but I was impressed because my advisor Irving Segal was extremely critical of most scientists and had relatively few friends among mathematicians and physicists and among them were uh George Mackey um a few others at and and Ivan Todorov. Uh so I I figured that this Todorov character must be something special. Later I read the book on quantum field theory by Bogolyubov Logunov and Todorov, which I refer to as BLT which if you're from America, you'll know that's also the name of a sandwich. But the book was very helpful to me. So I was always interested in him and I was delighted when much later he and Michel Dubois-Violette started [snorts] working on trying to understand the standard model using octonions. And so that's what I'd like to talk about. Um so let's dive in. Let's see if I can do this. So, I'm only going to talk about the gauge group of the standard model, not the particles actually, not not the other non-gauge bosons. And not the other particles that aren't gauge bosons. So, I like to think of this group as S of U2 * U3. So, what that means is it's the group of all matrices in SU5 that have a block diagonal form with a 2 by 2 block and a 3 by 3 block. So, you what we're doing here is we're taking U2 * U3, we're embedding it in U5, and then we're looking at only those matrices with determinant one. And remarkably, that turns out to be U1 * SU2 * SU3 modulo Z mod 6. So, the reason why it works out that way is that you can stick a complex phase in the 2 by 2 block and a compensating complex phase in the 3 by 3 block in such a way that the total determinant is one, uh but you need to take the phase in the 2 by 2 block and have its cube cancel the square of the phase in the 3 by 3 block because that's how determinants work. And so, when that phase is a sixth root of unity, uh you you get um you get cancel it it uh you don't get Sorry, you have to mod out by sixth roots of unity uh to get this description here. And the interesting thing is that this subgroup Z mod 6 sitting inside U1 * SU2 * SU3 acts trivially on all the particles we know. So, all grand unified theories, or at least all the ones I know, take advantage of the fact that you can compress the standard model gauge group a little bit modding out by Z mod 6. Uh for example, the SU5 grand unified theory relies it precisely on this embedding of the standard model gauge group in SU5, but it only works if you mod out by the Z mod 6. So, I think of this uh quotient group, or better, SU2 * U3 as the true gauge group of the standard model. So, why are all the particles in nature representations of this particular group? Well, as you I'm sure you know, nobody knows why. We don't really know uh although there's been various attempts to understand it. So, it's an interesting question, what's special about this group? And so, Todorov and Dubois-Violette in the paper you see here, tried to answer this question by getting a hold of this group in an interesting way using the exceptional Jordan algebra, which I'll call H3O, because it's consist of hermitian or self-adjoint matrices, which are 3 by 3 matrices of octonions. Um and their paper is very nice and got me interested in trying to ex- understand that a little bit more deeply. So, I've been interested in Jordan algebras, and the particular kind called Euclidean Jordan algebras were proposed as a framework for dealing with observables in quantum physics, and in fact, the exceptional Jordan algebra was first discovered in the classification of these Euclidean Jordan algebras. We can think of it as the algebra of observables of an octonionic qutrit. So, a qubit has observables given by 2 by 2 self-adjoint complex matrices, but you could talk about a uh octonionic qubit if you used octonion 2 by 2 matrices. Here, we're using 3 by 3 matrices, so like we call that a qutrit. And so, what I'll show you today is that following the ideas of Dubois-Violette and Todorov, we can see that the gauge group of the standard model has a nice description. It consists of those symmetries of an octonionic qutrit that preserve a complex qutrit, which you can think of as contained within it, and a complex qubit, which is contained within that. So, more precisely, this gauge group S of U2 * U3 is the connected component the identity component of the group of Jordan algebra automorphisms of H3O that preserve this extra structure, namely, we pick a Jordan subalgebra that's isomorphic to H3C, so there's your complex qutrit, and then within that, you pick a Jordan subalgebra that's isomorphic to H2C. There's your complex qubit. So, we have these three nested Jordan algebras, and the gauge group of the standard model falls out as the connected component of the group that preserves that structure. So, but let me start at the beginning. What What can we do with Jordan algebras, and what can we do with observables? So, our standard picture of observables in finite-dimensional quantum systems would be self-adjoint complex matrices, so elements of HNC. What can we do with such things? Well, you can't multiply them and get another one, and you can't uh Uh there are other things you can't do with them, but what you can do with with them is you can take real linear combinations of them. And although you can't take products of them in general, you can square one. So, the square of a self-adjoint matrix is self-adjoint. And then using those two operations, squaring and linear combinations, you can define a Jordan product of A and B, which is 1/2 of A + B squared - A squared - B squared. So, that's the symmetrized product AB + BA / 2. So, this product is a little bit odd. Um it's commutative, obviously. It's not associative, but it is, however, power associative. So, if you keep multiplying copies of the same observable, then the way you parenthesize it doesn't have any effect. And Jordan, Wigner, and von Neumann argued that these were really fairly minimal things you might hope a collection of observables should obey. You should be able to take linear combinations of them. There's no reason that you should be able to multiply two observables and get another observable, like position and momentum. You can't separately measure them and write down the product of the answers and expect that that is the what you'd get if you measured position times momentum, but you can square or raise to a power an observable and get an observable. So, they turned these ideas into a rather crisp definition. The Euclidean Jordan algebra is a real vector space with a bilinear operation that's commutative, and it's power associative, and finally, this Euclidean property, which is that if you have a sum of squares of elements and it's zero, then they all individually have to be zero. So, that's an an expression of the fact that we expect these observables to describe real-valued measurements. And the sum of squares of real numbers can be zero only if all those numbers are individually zero. So, this is a very beautiful definition. You often see a different definition of Jordan algebra that involves a rather scary-looking identity, which we saw in the last talk by Federica. And the beautiful thing is that that identity actually follows from this definition that I've given here. So, that as long as you're working with Euclidean Jordan algebras, you don't need to include that scary and unmotivated axiom. This was shown in Jordan, Wigner, and von Neumann's original paper. And they classified Euclidean Jordan algebras. So, they showed that every finite-dimensional Euclidean Jordan algebra is an isomorphic to a direct sum of finitely many different ones on this list. So, HNR consists of the n by n self-adjoint real matrices with the Jordan product defined as I mentioned before, 1/2 AB + BA. And then there's HNC, that's the most familiar one where we use self-adjoint complex matrices. But, you can also use HNH, where you take self-adjoint quaternionic matrices. And you can also take HNO, which are n by n self-adjoint octonionic matrices. But, that last one only works if n is less than or equal to three. The non-associativity of the octonions screws things up if you're have too many octonions around. Uh but in the case n equals 3, you can check that everything still works. And that that's that's as far as you can go, and that's the called the exceptional Jordan algebra. They also discovered another series called spin factors, which are of the form R direct sum Rn, where the product is shown here, where you take the two scalars, which I'll think of as time coordinates, and you multiply them, and you take the dot product of the space coordinates, which are the these vectors, to be the new time coordinate, and then you do time times space plus time times space to be the new spatial coordinate. And that's it. Those are all of them. Now, there are a lot of nice theorems about Euclidean Jordan algebras. So, every such thing comes with a cone of non-negative elements. So, you can define elements to be non-negative if it's a sum of squares, and this is a cone in the sense that you can multiply a non-negative element by a positive real number, and it stays non-negative. That's easy to see. And also the sum of two non-negative elements is non-negative. That's also easy to see. Uh and this cone is not the whole Jordan algebra. It It's It's a proper cone, as shown in the picture here. And indeed, for the spin factors, these cones are just the same as the future cone in Minkowski space-time, in n plus one dimensional Minkowski space-time. So, the spin factors have some interesting relationship to Minkowski space-time. Um so, it went backwards there. Should go into the forwards light cone, not the backwards light cone. So, every Euclidean Jordan algebra also has a determinant function, which is an invariant polynomial that vanishes only on the boundary Well, it it vanishes on the boundary of J plus and it vanishes precisely on the boundary of the cone shown shown here which consists of the boundary of J plus and also the boundary of this negative cone. And in fact that uniquely determine this property uniquely characterizes the determinant. It's the only up to a scale factor it's the only invariant polynomial that vanishes on the boundary of J plus and is positive in the interior. And for a spin factor this determinant is just the Minkowski metric or just the Minkowski inner product of a point in space time with itself. But but you have these for all the Euclidean Jordan algebras. Ah, sorry this keeps not working. So so you can say that spin factors are not only algebras of observables, you can also think of them as Minkowski space times. But be careful here because any Euclidean Jordan algebra also has a trace which is an invariant linear functional that's positive on the positive cone. And using this trace you can give [clears throat] the Jordan algebra an invariant Euclidean inner product as well as well if not so now not Minkowski but but Euclidean, you just take the trace of the Jordan product of two elements. So for spin factors you have in addition to the Minkowski inner product a Euclidean inner product. So it has both structures which is a little strange. Another interesting thing is that the Jordan algebras of the two by two self adjoint matrices are isomorphic to spin factors. So those are H2R, H2C, H2H and H2O. Those are isomorphic to these spin factors here, which you can think of as um Minkowski space-times or Euclidean space-times of dimensions 3, 4, 6, and 10, which are numbers quite familiar from string theory. And the way it works is just uh Well, you can see what's going on by by by doing this, you take the determinant of that 2 by 2 matrix, and you get the uh Minkowski metric, and you take the the 1/2 the trace of the product of an element of the spin factor of the of a matrix in itself, and you see you get a uh Euclidean inner product. So, that's why you get things that are combinations of Minkowski and Euclidean space-times. So, that's an overview of the uh Euclidean Jordan algebras, and I guess I didn't say, but maybe I don't need to say that the reason why R, C, H, and O show up here is that they are the normed division algebras, and there are exactly four of them, just those four. Um But, a little bit more to say about this is that Euclidean Jordan algebra doesn't just describe observables, it also describes states. So, you can take any element in the positive cone with trace one, and we call those states. And then if you have a state and an observable, that is an element of your Jordan algebra, you can define the expected value of the observable in the state just by taking the trace of the state Jordan product with the observable. So, that's somewhat familiar uh if you're used to taking the expected value of a uh observable in some mixed state described by a density matrix. So, here you can think of the state S as being a generalization of a density matrix. Now, we say that element of a Jordan algebra is a projection if its square is itself. And a projection with trace one is called a pure state. So, you can think of pure states as special kinds of states. And when your Jordan algebra is n by n complex matrices that are self-adjoint, all of this is just the familiar stuff you're used to in quantum mechanics, in which case here a state is just a density matrix, which is a non-negative self-adjoint matrix with trace one. And a pure state is is is one where one of the eigenvalues is one and all the rest are are equal to zero. They're on the boundary of the set of states. So, that works. We get something similar to that not only in the complex case, but the real, quaternionic, and octonionic cases, we get these projective spaces RPn-1, CPn-1, HPn-1, and OPn-1 when n is less than or equal to three. Uh these projective spaces are your spaces of pure states. Oops, I keep doing that. Sorry. Um So, here's a picture of what's going on for the spin factor when n equals two. So, here's the light cone in three-dimensional Minkowski space-time. And then we have the If we slice that with this uh plane of matrices where the trace is equal to one, that's you get this ball here or two-dimensional disk shaded in gray here, which is your states. And then the pure states are at the boundary. They're They're in blue. So, you get something similar in all these other cases, but it's harder to draw and a little more complicated. So, for the four division algebras, you get these four spin factors, and then you get these projective lines as the set of pure states. And these projective lines are in fact spheres. So, CP1 is the Riemann sphere, we're very familiar with that, but there's also a Riemann circle, RP1, and there's a four sphere, which is HP1, and an eight sphere, which is OP1, as the set of pure states. We can think of these pure states as states of a chiral spinner in three, four, six, or 10-dimensional space-time. And any such spinner is just described by a pair of numbers, which could be real, complex, quaternionic, or octonionic. So, a chiral spinner in those dimensions is described by either real, complex, quaternionic, or octonionic qubit. And since we seem to live in four-dimensional space-time, we are extremely familiar with the complex qubits as describing spinners, but the story works in these other dimensions. Okay, so that's very nice, but what about this exceptional Jordan case, where we get octonionic qutrits? So, what about the exceptional Jordan algebra H3O? So, here's what it looks like. So, here 3 by 3 uh self-adjoint matrix with entries in octonions. So, because it's self-adjoint, the diagonal entries have to be real numbers, so you get three real numbers. And then the upper triangular entries, you take their octonionic conjugates, and there you get the lower uh triangular entries. So, you get 3 * 8 off-diagonal entries, so you get a total dimension of three times eight plus three or 27, so it's a 27 dimensional algebra and it's automorphism group is very nice. It's a exceptional Lie group. It's the one called F4, the second smallest one of the exceptional Lie groups and it's 52 dimensional. So, what Tonner and de Buaviolet is show that the symmetries of the exceptional Jordan algebra are connected to the gauge group of the standard model. And I've been mulling over that result of theirs for some time now. They work very much in coordinates and I wanted a more invariant way of describing what they had found and so working with Paul Swan and getting a key extra bit of help from David Madore uh we proved this theorem, I'll call theorem one, which says this. So, suppose you start out with H3O, the exceptional Jordan algebra, and you take two Jordan sub algebras of it. So, A is isomorphic to H2O which fits inside H3O in lots of different ways and B is isomorphic to H3C which also fits in H3O in lots of ways. Now, if you have these two sub algebras, A and B, they could intersect in various possible ways but the biggest way they could intersect is if their intersection is H2C. That's sort of the obvious thing you might try to do. If you intersect H2O and H3C using the fact that you can think of C as contained in O in various ways. So, if you have this type of situation then it turns out that it's preserved by the standard model gauge group. A little bit more precisely if you take the stabilizer of A, that is the subgroup of automorphisms of the Jordan algebra H3O that preserve A set wise, and you intersect it with the identity component of the stabilizer of B, you get the standard model gauge group. I feel a little bit irritated still that I need to say that we're using the identity component of the stabilizer of B. I discovered that only very recently. It turns out that this that if we didn't include that identity component uh clause, we'd get a group that had two connected components, one of which was the standard model gauge group, and the other of which involved complex conjugation. And it would act as complex conjugation on H2C and H3C. Uh so that you might say that has something to do with uh charge conjugation. So, I don't want to think about it, but I can't help thinking about it because it's sort of the last thing that I discovered. It's being a little sloppy about connected components before. So, here's an example of this situation. This is what uh Yvonne and Michelle thought about. We start with H3O, we take A to be the upper 2 by 2 block. Uh and so that's isomorphic to H2O. We take B to be matrices that all have to complex entries. So, that's H3C. That's a copy of H3C sitting inside H3O. And then clearly their intersection will be this A intersect B will be the 2 by 2 block, but now where the matrices have only complex entries. Of course, the diagonal entries are always real. So, let's take this as our example of a situation where you have H2O and H3C both fitting nicely inside H3O in such a way that their intersection is the best it could be, which is H2C, the biggest it could be. So, they showed that in this example the stabilizer of A intersect B connected component identity component of the stabilizer of B is the standard model gauge group. So, let me explain why that's true because it's actually quite pretty how the different aspects of the standard model gauge group show up. So, there are different ways to prove this, but I think the nicest way I know so far is this. So, first we look at this identity component of the stabilizer of B. It turns out that that is the group SU3 * SU3 modulo Z mod 3. So, Z mod 3 sits inside SU3 as uh multiples of the identity matrix. That is cube root of 1 * the identity matrix. And what we're doing here is we're including Z mod 3 into both copies of SU3 in the diagonal kind of way. That's the Z mod 3 that we are going to mod out by. So, in this special case where we take B to be the 3 by 3 complex self-adjoint matrices they showed that the the stabilizer of B has this form. So, let's see why. Well, to do this, we need to get good at doing calculations with octonions. There are different ways to describe octonions. My favorite way for this purpose copies a construction of the quaternions. So, a very nice thing about the quaternions is that you can think of the quaternions as the real numbers direct sum R3, i.e. scalars direct sum vectors, where the multiplication uses all the operations you learn about when you take vector uh when you study vectors in three dimensions. So, the that is to get the scalar part of the product of two quaternions, you take the product of their scalar parts and you subtract off the dot product of their vector parts. Um and then to get the vector part of the product, you multiply the scalar part of one with the vector part of the other in both possible ways, and then you add the cross product of A and B. Indeed, when Hamilton invented quaternions, the dot product and the cross product had not yet been separately invented. He invented the quaternion product, and then only later did people like Gibbs and Heaviside break apart the quaternions into a scalar part and a vector part, and break apart quaternion multiplication into these familiar operations. So, one nice thing about this is that because we're just using the structure of R3 as an oriented inner product space, it's becomes clear that SO3 is going to act as automorphisms of the quaternions, and in fact, that's all the automorphisms of the quaternions is the group SO3. So, how can we copy this and get the octonions? Well, you just replace the real numbers by the complex numbers and you replace the inner product of real numbers by the usual inner product of complex numbers. So we define the octonions in this approach to be the complex numbers direct sum C3 with a multiplication that copies our formula for the multiplication of quaternions. But notice now we're using the complex inner product of two complex vectors and there are a couple of extra twists here. You'll see that two terms in this formula have a bar on top of them. Um the bar means complex conjugation and the bar in the last entry here means you take the complex conjugate of each component of your complex vector. This formula looks a little bit strange with those bars, but it turns out that if you um work in a more sophisticated way using the exterior algebra instead of just the cross product, um it becomes a bit more elegant. And then both of these constructions, you can see that they're completely parallel except that we're using a complex inner product in the second case. Because we're only using the complex inner product structure and orientation on C3 here, um it's then becomes immediately evident that SU3 is going to act as automorphisms of the octonions where it acts on C3 here in the usual three-dimensional representation of SU3 and it acts trivially on the scalars. So we get automorphisms of the octonions from SU3, but we don't get all of them because what we have done here is we've taken the octonions and described it in a way where we pick out a particular copy of the complex numbers. We privilege a particular number and call call it I. So, the octonions have lots of square roots of minus one, a whole um six-sphere of them, I guess. Uh and we're just picking one and calling it I and privileging it. So, SU3 turns out to be the automorphisms of the octonions that preserve this chosen copy of the octonions of the complex numbers and of this particular number I. But, this is very useful because we're trying to see what SU3 has to do with the octonions. Remember, we were trying to show that the stabilizer of this H3C and H3O was built up out of it two copies of SU3. So, this is the right way to think about the octonions for this purpose. So, here's how we do it. This construction I actually learned from Yokota's book exceptional Lie groups. So, what you do is you can now take H3O and you can split it as an orthogonal direct sum of two vector spaces. It contains H3C as a subspace and then we take the orthogonal complement of that H3C perp. And what is that concretely? Well, it consists of matrices of this form that have zeros down the diagonal because those diagonal matrices were already in H3C. And then it has off-diagonal terms that live not in C but in the orthogonal complement of C in O, which is C3. Remember, we split the octonions into C and C3. So, here these X, Y, and Z are living in in C3, the leftover part. So, then what we can do is take this matrix, and we can take the matrix entries X, Y, and Z, which are elements of C3, and we can treat them as column vectors, and so we can create a 3 by 3 matrix out of them with these three columns X, Y, and Z. And so, what we've shown is that H3C perp is isomorphic in a standard way to M3C, the space of 3 by 3 complex matrices. So, this is a nice way to think about how we're chopping up the exceptional Jordan algebra into H3C and M3C. So, we get this vector space isomorphism between H3O and these two pieces, H3C and M3C. So, any element of the exceptional or Jordan algebra, we can think of as a pair of matrices, which I'll call X and M. The first is in H3C, the second is in M3C. Then using this, Yokota points out that you can get SU3 times SU3 to act on such pairs. So, if we have an element G, H in SU3 times SU3, we can get it to act on such a pair. So, what it So, G, the first element of SU3, it conjugates X or multiplies by G on one side and it's conjugate transpose on the other, which is the same as the inverse of G, cuz G's in SU3. And then, it acts on M in this funny way. It acts just on the right by G uh adjoint. Whereas H, the element of the second copy of SU3, it only acts on M, multiplying it on the left. This is a little peculiar, but this is the right way to do it. We'll see why it's so good in just a second. But, one thing you can notice is that if you take a cube root of unity and you double it up, make a pair of it to be your G and your H. That will act trivially. The the the The phases will cancel in this formula here. So, Z mod 3 sitting inside SU3 * SU3 uh will act trivially. So, we get an action of SU3 * SU3 mod Z mod 3 on the exceptional Jordan algebra. So, we get this representation of SU3 * SU3 mod Z mod 3 on the exceptional Jordan algebra. And what's so good about it is that first of all, it preserves H3C, the sub algebra H3C, which I'm calling B. Does that by construction, you can see that right away that the it just maps things of the in the first slot to things in the first slot. And then second of all, it preserves the Jordan product product on H3O. So, that's a fairly easy calculation. You just have to calculate what happens uh before and after you apply the the this element of this group, and you see it preserves the Jordan product. So, then with some more work, you can show that this group is actually the largest connected group of automorphisms of the exceptional Jordan algebra that preserves this sub algebra H3C. One quick and easy way to do it, if you're willing to use a sledgehammer, is you use something called Borel-de Siebenthal theory, which classifies the maximal connected well, classifies of the maximal connected subgroups of simple Lie groups. And if you look up how that theory works, you'll see that this group SU3 * SU3 mod Z mod 3 is a maximal connected subgroup of F4. That is of the automorphism group of H3O. So, of course, this group is the largest connected group with this property because it's it's maximal. Even even if you drop the property, it it's it's you can't There's no bigger subgroup except, of course, the whole group F4. So, there are also more concrete ways to check this result, but anyway, what we get is what we want, which is that the identity component of the stabilizer of this subalgebra B is SU3 * SU3 mod Z mod 3. Now, what we're going to do is we're going to find the standard model gauge group inside here. It's already starting to look a little bit like the standard model gauge group, except, of course, the standard model gauge group looks more like SU2 * U1 * SU3. So, um so, this group here must be a little bit too big. And indeed, we get that's how it works. The But, it's really important to notice that the two SU3s in this group here, they act very differently on H3O. The first copy of SU3 mixes up the matrix entries in our 3 by 3 matrix, which is an element of H3O, because we're doing things like taking that matrix X and conjugating it by an element of SU3. And so, if you look and think about it a bit, the only transformations that preserve the upper 2 by 2 block are a special subgroup of SU3, namely the subgroup that consists of matrices in SU3 that have a 2 by 2 block in the upper left and then a 1 by 1 block in the lower right. So, only the subgroup S of U2 * U1 preserves this block here. And this subgroup becomes the electroweak gauge group. The electroweak gauge group is this group S of U2 * U1. You might have thought it was SU2 * U1, but if you examine it, you see that there's a Z mod 2 in there that acts trivially on all particles in the standard model. So, in some sense, the true electroweak gauge group is SU2 * U1 mod Z mod 2. And that's lucky for us because that's what we got, and that's what we get here. Now, the second SU3 becomes the strong force gauge group. So, it acts separately on each matrix entry. Each matrix entry is an octonion, but we've seen that the octonions can be described using complex numbers in such a way that SU3 acts as automorphisms of the octonions that preserve that copy of the complex numbers sitting inside the octonions that we've chosen. So, this SU3 acts in that way. It acts trivially on all the real numbers, and it acts non-trivially on all of these off-diagonal entries. But this whole copy of SU3 preserves the upper 2 by 2 block because it acts separately on each matrix entry. And that upper block there is of course this copy of H2O that I've been was calling A which sits inside the octonion uh which sits inside H3O. So therefore we've proved what we wanted that the stabilizer of A intersect the identity component of the stabilizer of B is this group here. Well, I haven't quite shown you that this is the standard model of gauge group, but it is. So it's S of U2 * U1 * SU3 all mod Z mod 3. But that really is the standard model of gauge group because if you finagle it a little bit, you can see that that group is the same thing as S of U2 * U3. You can combine you can you can distribute the phase here that's sitting in the U1, put some of the phase into the U2, that is put a copy of that uh some power of that phase in your U2, I guess the cube of that phase in your U2, and then put minus second power of that phase in your SU3, and and you get uh you get an element of U2 * U3 with determinant one. So that's what that's a way to see what Dubois Dubois and Ivancevic proved. But notice they proved this result in a very coordinate dependent way in the following sense that they picked a specific copy of H2O and a specific copy of H3C sitting inside H3O and proved the result in that one case. And you might worry if you're a mathematician who doesn't like coordinate dependent results you might worry that this was an artifact of that particular choice of A and B. So, it's nice to have a more general result. And that's what That's That's what the uh general theorem says, that we could have taken any copy of A and B as long as they intersect in a copy of H2C, and you would still get the same result. So, to prove to prove that it's enough to show that what Dubau Viallet and Todorov did in their example is universal. In other words, that any other example is no different than this one. To be precise, that F4 acts transitively on the set of pairs of Jordan subalgebras, say A and B, where A is isomorphic to H2O and B is isomorphic to H3C, and their intersection is isomorphic to H2C. I'll put the proof of this fact, or at least a pretty detailed sketch of the proof, at the end of these slides, but I don't think I'll bother you with with that proof. Um There's nothing worse than, especially at the end of a long day, hearing someone run through a long proof at the end of their talk. So, I I won't I won't do do that to you. I've already made you suffer enough. But, in proving this, Paul Swan and I discovered something really interesting. A step in proving this was turned out to be to show that every Jordan subalgebra of H3O that's isomorphic to H2C is actually contained in a unique Jordan subalgebra that's isomorphic to H2O. So, that's interesting, you see, because this proposition here, or the theorem mentions three different sub-algebras, H2O, H3C, and their intersection, which is H2C. But what we see now from this lemma is that that intersection, that copy of H2C, it determines this larger algebra H2O. There's only one possible algebra isomorphic to H2O that contains a given copy of H2C. So it allows us to avoid mentioning H2O in the statement of the theorem. Oops. Um and so we get this result, which is actually nicer, I believe, which goes like this. It just doesn't mention H2O. It just mentions H2C and H3C. So here it goes. So suppose X and B are Jordan sub-algebras of H3O. One of them's X is isomorphic to H2C, B is isomorphic to H3C, and X is contained in B. So just on the basis of that, then the stabilizer of X intersect the identity component of the stabilizer of B is the standard model gauge group. So I like this because because we are in a world where it doesn't seem as if the octonions are playing any role in the physics we see. We seem quite happy with complex quantum mechanics for most purposes. So if we are going to try to say that the octonions are relevant to the standard model, we have to explain how they are hidden. And so this type of result, um is an example of how that might theoretically, possibly work. We have this large algebra of observables H3O, but we only get the standard model of gauge group when we pick a copy of H3C in it, and then a copy of H2C in that, and then restrict the symmetry group down to the symmetries that preserve those, and then we get the standard model gauge group. So, symmetries that map X and D to some other sub algebras would not be seen within the standard model gauge group. And so, H3O just sort of serves as some kind of background to what we see, but not we don't really see it directly. So, my conclusions are these, very loosely we can say that the standard model gauge group consists of symmetries of an octonionic qutrit, that's that's what H3O was describing the observables of, that preserve a complex qutrit contained within it, and then a complex qubit contained within that. And you may notice that I kept saying identity components, and being sort of annoyed that I had to say that fine print, and I should just come out and say that if I didn't say identity component, we wouldn't get the standard model gauge group, we'd get a group with two components, one of which was the standard model gauge group, but the other one would preserve H3C and H2C, but in a funny way that was switching I and negative I, so it would be it would it would be acting on these two uh kinds of matrices by conjugating each complex conjugating each matrix entry. So, that's not so terrible as far as I'm concerned. Um it just means that to get to the standard model, we are not only having to pick a copy of the complex numbers in the octonions, but we are also having to pick a choice of what is I, or more precisely, we don't really quite have to do that. We just have to exclude symmetries that switch I and negative I. So, in other words, we have to um treat anti-unitary transformations as different from unitary ones, not treat them on an equal footing. So, naturally, if you're a physicist, you'll ask, "Okay, so what is this all good for? Could we describe the particles and the interactions of the standard model using this framework?" And there are definitely obstacles to doing that. Various people, including starting with Du Bois-Violette and Todorov, have tried to do that. And it's been difficult. And so, it might not even work at all. So, it's possible that this result here is just a coincidence that doesn't really lead us anywhere. But maybe it's not a coincidence. There are not many people thinking about this stuff. So, I can't say that we have tried everything yet. And in particular, the octonions are so unusual that many standard uh rules of thumb don't apply to them. So, for example, there are many rules of thumb that people have developed in the study of grand unified theories. For example, that the all the if you if you have a grand unified gauge group, it must have representations that are truly complex, that is, that aren't You need a representation that's not isomorphic to its conjugate representation to describe the particles we see. But all of that is based on complex quantum mechanics. And here when we go up to H3O, we're not doing complex quantum mechanics anymore. We're doing octonionic quantum mechanics, which is much less well understood. So there I think maybe possibly some room for maneuver. However, I'm not asserting that I know how to solve those problems. Uh I'm just posing it as a possible avenue for some few people to work on, like me and some of my friends. Um by the way, uh Latham Boyle and I are having a little uh private workshop on octonions in physics this summer, and I hope that we make the all the talks uh visible on via Zoom, so that at least you can attend virtually there. We don't have the funds or the room for a uh to to invite a lot of people, but yeah, I do want to make the proceedings or the talks available. So I'll stop here, and thanks very much for inviting me, and have a nice afternoon. >> Good job. So now we see some Nikolai Nikolov. He's asking a question in the chat. Can Can we see >> Oh, yeah, I see I can see the chat. >> So I'm I'm going to ask If the fundamental fields of the standard model are viewed as sections of a vector bundle, what additional structure must be imposed on the fibers of the bundle so that the gauge group of the standard model arises naturally as the symmetry group of the fibers? >> Uh-huh. So So here, the only fundamental fields that I'm talking about implicitly are the gauge bosons because I'm talking about the gauge group. And so, you could imagine uh a vector bundle which is the adjoint bundle of of F4 to the Lie algebra of F4 is the fibers of your bundle. And so, the the structure that I'm imposing there is that we don't want all transform we want to we want to only we want to privilege transformations in F4 that preserve a copy of H3C and then a smaller copy of H2C inside the exceptional Jordan algebra. Now, if you're trying to talk about other fields like fermions, uh then you have to describe the answer differently. The fermions are very beautifully described in one generation are described as the exterior algebra of C5. And that has potentially, you know, a large group of symmetries that could act on it, but you again would have to chop it down so that the standard model of gauge group which is S of U2 * U3 only those transformations of C5 act as symmetries. What I would like to do is to relate that story, which I've written about elsewhere, and other people have certainly know about that. I would like to relate that better to this octonionic story. Um but there's some difficulties in doing that. >> Thank you. So, is it all right I I can >> read out loud John Barrett's question. Hi John. Does the standard model admit the additional anti-symmetries you described as gauge symmetries? Well, since there since it's essentially just an Z mod 2 extra anti-linear symmetry that we need to throw into the usual standard model gauge group to get the larger group. Since that's a discrete group, it's hard for us to see it as gauge symmetries unless space-time is not simply connected. Uh but we could still ask your question even though it's not experimentally even though I don't see how to how that's like an experimental question. Uh and since I've just discovered Right, you just need it to act on the fermions in the right way. Since I just discovered the need for this extra Z mod 2, I'll admit it I discovered it yesterday in a panic. Uh that's why I added this all these sub zeros in my slides. I'm not quite sure to the answer of your question. So, so you as you know we the standard model has CPT symmetry uh and not much more not not C or P individually. So, so that's how it's I mean if it's going to act as I think it sort of has to act like that on on the fermions, but I have not I've not thought about it beyond that. So, yes, that's a very interesting thing to work on. >> Yeah, it just seems like a calculation one could do or try and do. >> Yes. Yeah, I I I think I can even I think I can even do it, but I didn't do it yet. It's It's all It's all too new. Um I I discovered to my horror yesterday, although I should have known it before, that this Bo- Borel the Siebenthal classification of maximal subgroups of a simple Lie group was not actually classifying maximal subgroups. It was classifying maximal connected subgroups. And and so that this And so this thing that I thought was maximal was not maximal. There's just a little Z mod 2 extra on top of it. But it could be quite interesting physically. I mean, it could be like good rather than bad if I if if this turns out to If the answer to your first question is yes, then then I'll then I'm happy or So, physics is always very suspenseful, as you know. Uh